the irish guards in the great war 


                                     

books by rudyard kipling 


  actions and reactions 

  brushwood boy, the 

  captains courageous 

  collected verse 

  days work, the 

  departmental ditties and ballads and barrackroom ballads 

  diversity of creatures, a 

  eyes of asia, the 

  feet of the young men, the 

  five nations, the 

  france at war 

  fringes of the fleet 

  from sea to sea 

  history of england, a 

  irish guards in the great war, the 

  jungle book, the 

  jungle book, second 

  just so song book 

  just so stories 

  kim 

  kipling anthology, prose and verse 

  kipling stories and poems every child should know 

  kipling birthday book, the 

  letters of travel 

  lifes handicap being stories of mine own people 

  light that failed, the 

  many inventions 

  naulahka, the with wolcott balestier 

  plain tales from the hills 

  puck of pooks hill 

  rewards and fairies 

  rudyard kiplings verse inclusive edition, 18851918 

  sea warfare 

  seven seas, the 

  soldier stories 

  soldiers three, the story of the gadsbys, and in black and white 

  song of the english, a 

  songs from books 

  stalky  co. 

  they 

  traffics and discoveries 

  under the deodars, the phantom rickshaw, and wee willie winkie 

  with the night mail 

  years between, the 

                                     


illustration 

  itinerary 
  of the 
  first battalion irish guards 
  august 1914december 1918. 

  emery walker ltd. del. et sc. 


printed in great britain by emery walker ltd., london 


the irish guards in the great war 

edited and compiled from 
their diaries and papers 

by 

rudyard kipling 


illustration decorative diamond icon 

volume i 

the first battalion 






garden city      new york 
doubleday, page  company 
1923 


illustration personal colophon of rudyard kipling 


copyright, 1923, by 
rudyard kipling 

all rights reserved, including that of translation 
into foreign languages, including the scandinavian 

printed in the united states 
at 
the country life press, garden city, n. y. 

first edition 




                               contents 

                                                           page 
  introduction                                               ix 


                                 1914 

  mons to la basse                                           1 


                                 1915 

  la basse to laventie                                      53 


                                 1916 

  the salient to the somme                                  130 


                                 191z 

  the somme to gouzeaucourt                                 194 


                                 1918 

  arras to the armistice                                    252 




                              list of maps 


  itinerary of the first battalion irish guards       frontispiece 

  the retreat from mons, 1914. northern section    facing page   6 

  the retreat from mons, 1914. southern section                  14 

  the ypres salient. first battalion actions                     32 

  actions and billets. first battalion                           58 

  the somme. first battalion               between pages  164, 165 

  the final advance, augustnovember 1918         facing page  288 




introduction 


these volumes try to give soberly and with what truth is possible, 
the experiences of both battalions of the irish guards from 1914 to 
1918. the point of view is the battalions, and the facts mainly 
follow the regimental diaries, supplemented by the few private 
letters and documents which such a war made possible, and by some 
tales that have gathered round men and their actions. 

as evidence is released, historians may be able to reconstruct what 
happened in or behind the battleline what motives and necessities 
swayed the actors and who stood up or failed under his burden. 
but a battalions field is bounded by its own vision. even within 
these limits, there is large room for error. witnesses to phases of 
fights die and are dispersed the ground over which they fought is 
battered out of recognition in a few hours survivors confuse dates, 
places, and personalities, and in the trenches, the monotony of the 
waiting days and the repetitionwork of repairs breed mistakes and 
false judgments. men grow doubtful or oversure, and, in all good 
faith, give directly opposed versions. the clear sight of a comrade 
so mangled that he seems to have been long dead is burnt in on one 
brain to the exclusion of all else that happened that day. the shock 
of an exploded dump, shaking down a firmament upon the landscape, 
dislocates memory throughout half a battalion and so on in all 
matters, till the end of laborious enquiry is too often the opening 
of fresh confusion. when to this are added the personal prejudices 
and misunderstandings of men under heavy strain, carrying clouded 
memories of orders half given or half heard, amid scenes that pass 
like nightmares, the only wonder to the compiler of these records 
has been that any sure fact whatever should be retrieved out of the 
whirlpool of war. 

it seemed to him best, then, to abandon all idea of such broad 
and balanced narratives as will be put forward by experts, and to 
limit himself to matters which directly touched the mens lives and 
fortunes. nor has he been too careful to correct the inferences of 
the time by the knowledge of later events. from first to last, the 
irish guards, like the rest of our armies, knew little of what was 
going on round them. probably they knew less at the close of the war 
than at the beginning when our forces were so small that each man 
felt himself somebody indeed, and so stood to be hunted through the 
heat from mons to meaux, turned again to suffer beneath the soupir 
ridges, and endured the first hideous winter of the salient where, 
wet, almost weaponless, but unbroken, he helped in the long miracle 
of holding the line. 

but the men of 14 and 15, and what meagre records of their day were 
safe to keep, have long been lost while the crowded years between 
remove their battles across dead belgian towns and villages as far 
from us as the fights in homer. 

doubtless, all will be reconstructed to the satisfaction of future 
years when, if there be memory beyond the grave, the ghosts may 
laugh at the neatly groomed histories. meantime, we can take it for 
granted that the old regular army of england passed away in the mud 
of flanders in less than a year. in training, morale, endurance, 
courage, and devotion the earth did not hold its like, but it 
possessed neither the numbers, guns, nor equipment necessary for 
the type of war that overtook it. the fact of its unpreparedness 
has been extolled as proof of the purity of its countrys ideals, 
which must be great consolation to all concerned. but, how slowly 
that equipment was furnished, how inadequate were our first attempts 
at bombs, trenchmortars, duckboards, wiring, and the rest, may 
be divined through the loyal and guarded allusions in the diaries. 
nor do private communications give much hint of it, for one of the 
marvels of that marvellous time was the silence of those concerned on 
everything that might too much distress their friends at home. the 
censorship had imposed this as a matter of precaution, but only the 
spirit of the officers could have backed the law so completely and, 
as better days came, their early makeshifts and contrivances passed 
out of remembrance with their early dead. but the sufferings of our 
armies were constant. they included wet and cold in due season, 
dirt always, occasional vermin, exposure, extreme fatigue, and the 
hourly incidence of death in every shape along the front line, and 
later in the furthest backareas where the enemy aeroplanes harried 
their camps. and when our regular troops had been expended, these 
experiences were imposed upon officers and men compelled to cover, 
within a few months, the long years of training that should go to 
the making of a soldiermen unbroken even to the disturbing impact 
of crowds and like experiences, which the conscript accepts from his 
youth. their short homeleaves gave them sudden changes to the tense 
home atmosphere where, under cover of a whirl of entertainment they 
and their kin wearied themselves to forget and escape a little from 
that life, on the brink of the next world, whose guns they could hear 
summoning in the silences between their talk. yet, some were glad to 
returnelse why should youngsters of three years experience have 
found themselves upon a frosty night, on an ironbound french road, 
shouting aloud for joy as they heard the stammer of a machinegun 
over the rise, and turned up the wellknown trench that led to their 
own dugout and their brethren from whom they had been separated 
by the vast interval of ninetysix hours? many have confessed to 
the same delight in their work, as there were others to whom almost 
every hour was frankly detestable except for the companionship that 
revealed them one to another till the chances of war separated the 
companions. and there were, too, many, almost children, of whom no 
record remains. they came out from warley with the constantly renewed 
drafts, lived the span of a second lieutenants life and were spent. 
their intimates might preserve, perhaps, memories of a promise 
cut short, recollections of a phrase that stuck, a chanceseen act 
of bravery or of kindness. the diaries give their names and fates 
with the conventional expressions of regret. in most instances, the 
compiler has let the mere fact suffice since, to his mind, it did 
not seem fit to heap words on the doom. 

for the same reason, he has not dealt with each instance of valour, 
leaving it to stand in the official language in which it was 
acknowledged. the rewards represent but a very small proportion of 
the skill, daring, and heroism actually noted for no volume could 
hold the full tale of all that was done, either in the way of duty, 
under constraint of necessity and desire to keep alive, or through 
joy and pleasure in achieving great deeds. 

here the irish rank and file by temperament excelled. they had 
all their races delight in the drama of things and, whatever 
the pinchwhether ambushed warfare or handtohand shock, 
or an insolently perfect parade after long divorce from the 
decenciescould be depended upon to advance the regimental honour. 
their discipline, of course, was that of the guards, which, based 
upon tradition, proven experience, and knowledge of the human heart, 
adjusts itself to the spirit of each of its battalions. though the 
material of that body might be expended twice in a twelvemonth, the 
leaven that remained worked on the new supplies at once and from the 
first. in the dingy outofdate barracks at warley the regimental 
reserves gathered and grew into a fullfledged second battalion 
with reserves of its own, and to these the wounded officers and 
men sent home to be repatched, explained the arts and needs of a 
war which, apparently always at a stand, changed character every 
month. after the utter inadequacy of its opening there was a period 
of handmade bombs and of loaded sticks for close work of nippers 
for the abundant wire left uncut by our few guns of remedies for 
trenchfeet or medicaments against lockjaw from the grossly manured 
belgian dirt, and of fancy timberings to hold up sliding trenches. 
in due course, when a few set battles, which sometimes gained several 
hundred yards, had wasted their many thousand lives, infallible forms 
of attack and defence developed themselves, were tried and generally 
found wanting, while scientific raids, the evolution of specialists, 
and the mass of regulated detail that more and more surrounded the 
life of the trenches, occupied their leisure between actions. our 
battalions played themselves into the game at the awful price that 
must be paid for improvisation, however cheery enduring with a 
philosophy that may have saved the war, the deviations and delays 
made necessary by the demands of the various political and other 
organisations at home. 

in the same spirit they accepted the inevitable breakdowns in the 
business of warbyexperiment for it is safe to say that there 
was hardly an operation in which platoons, companies, regiments, 
brigades, or divisions were not left with one or both flanks in the 
air. among themselves, officers and men discussing such matters make 
it quite clear how and why such and such units broke, were misled, 
or delayed on their way into the line. but when a civilian presumes 
to assist, all ranks unite against his uninformed criticisms. 
he is warned that, once over the top, no plans hold, for the 
machinegun and the lie of the ground dictate the situation to the 
platooncommander on whom all things depend and who sees, perhaps, 
fifty yards about him. there are limits, too, of shock and exhaustion 
beyond which humanity cannot be pressed without paying toll later. 
for which cause it may happen that a division that has borne long 
agony unflinching, and sincerely believes itself capable of yet more, 
will, for no reason then apparent at almost the mere rumour of 
noises in the night collapse ignominiously on the same ground where, 
a month later, with two thirds of its strength casualties, it cuts 
coolly and cleanly to its goal. and its fellows, who have borne the 
same yoke, allow for this. 

the compiler of these records, therefore, has made little attempt 
to put forward any theory of what might or should have happened if 
things had gone according to plan and has been scrupulous to avoid 
debatable issues of bad staffwork or faulty generalship. they were 
not lacking in the war, but the broad sense of justice in all who 
suffered from them, recognising that all were equally amateurs, saved 
the depression of repeated failures from turning into demoralisation. 

here, again, the irish were reported by those who knew them best, to 
have been lenient in their judgments, though their private speech 
was as unrestrained as that of any other body of bewildered and 
overmastered men. wearing down the enemy through a period of four 
years and three months, during most of which time that enemy dealt 
losses at least equal to those he received, tested human virtue upon 
a scale that the world had never dreamed of. the irish guards stood 
to the test without flaw. 

they were in no sense any mans command. they needed minute 
comprehension, quick sympathy, and inflexible justice, which they 
repaid by individual devotion and a collective goodwill that showed 
best when things were at their utter worst. their moods naturally 
varied with the weather and the burden of fatigues actions merely 
kill, while fatigue breaks mens hearts, but their morale was 
constant because their unofficial life, on which morale hinges, made 
for contentment. the discipline of the guards, demanding the utmost 
that can be exacted of the man, requires of the officer unresting 
care of his men under all conditions. this care can be a source of 
sorrow and friction in rigid or overconscientious hands, till, 
with the best will in the world, a battalion may be reduced to the 
mental state of nurseharried children. or, conversely, an adored 
company commander, bold as a lion, may, for lack of it, turn his 
puzzled company into a beargarden. but there is an elasticity in 
celtic psychology that does not often let things reach breakingpoint 
either way and their sense of humour and social dutyit is a race 
more careful to regard each others feelings than each others 
livesheld them as easily as they were strictly associated. a jest 
the grave hearing out of absurd complaints that might turn to tragedy 
were the hearing not accorded a prompt soothing down of gloomy, 
injured pride a piece of flagrant buffoonery sanctioned, even 
shared, but never taken advantage of, went far in dark days to build 
up that understanding and understood inner life of the two battalions 
to which, now, men look back lovingly across their civilian years. 
it called for a devotion from all, little this side of idolatry and 
was shown equally by officers, n.c.o.s, and men, stretcherbearers, 
cooks, orderlies, and not least by the hardbit, fantastic old 
soldiers, used for odd duties, who faithfully hobbled about france 
alongside the rush of wonderful young blood. 

were instances given, the impression might be false, for the tone 
and temper of the time that set the pace has gone over. but while 
it lasted, the men made their officers and the officers their men 
by methods as old as war itself and their roman catholic priests, 
fearless even in a community none too regardful of natures first 
law, formed a subtle and supple link between both. that the priest, 
ever in waiting upon death or pain, should learn to magnify his 
office was as natural as that doctors and frontline commanders 
should find him somewhat under their feet when occasion called for 
the secular, not the spiritual, arm. that commanding officers, to 
keep peace and save important pillars of their little society, should 
first advise and finally order the padre not to expose himself 
wantonly in forward posts or attacks, was equally of a piece with 
human nature and that the priests, to the huge content of the 
men, should disregard the order whats a casualty compared to a 
soul? was most natural of all. then the question would come up for 
discussion in the trenches and dugouts, where everything that any 
one had on his mind was thrashed out through the long, quiet hours, 
or dropped and picked up again with the rise and fall of shellfire. 
they speculated on all things in heaven and earth as they worked in 
piled filth among the carcases of their fellows, lay out under the 
stars on the eves of open battle, or vegetated through a months 
feeding and idleness between one sacrifice and the next. 

but none have kept minutes of those incredible symposia that made for 
them a life apart from the mad world which was their portion nor 
can any pen recreate that worlds brilliance, squalor, unreason, and 
heaped boredom. recollection fades from mens minds as common life 
closes over them, till even now they wonder what part they can ever 
have had in the shrewd, manhunting savages who answered to their 
names so few years ago. 

it is for the sake of these initiated that the compiler has loaded 
his records with detail and seeming triviality, since in a life where 
death ruled every hour, nothing was trivial, and bald references to 
villages, billets, camps, fatigues, and sports, as well as hints of 
tales that can never now fully be told, carry each their separate 
significance to each survivor, intimate and incommunicable as family 
jests. 

as regards other readers, the compiler dares no more than hope that 
some of those who have no care for old history, or that larger number 
who at present are putting away from themselves odious memories, may 
find a little to interest, or even comfort, in these very details and 
flatnesses that make up the unlovely, yet superb, life endured for 
their sakes. 

  rudyard kipling. 




the irish guards in the great war 




1914 

mons to la basse 


at 5 p. m. on tuesday, august 4, 1914, the 1st battalion of the irish 
guards received orders to mobilize for war against germany. they were 
then quartered at wellington barracks and, under the mobilization 
scheme, formed part of the 4th guards brigade, second division, 
first army corps. the brigade consisted of 

  the 2nd battalion grenadier guards. 
     2nd          coldstream guards. 
     3rd          coldstream guards. 
     1st          irish guards. 

mobilization was completed on august 8. next day, being sunday, 
the roman catholics of the battalion paraded under the commanding 
officer, lieut.colonel the hon. g. h. morris, and went to 
westminster cathedral where cardinal bourne preached and on the 
morning of the 11th august fieldmarshal lord roberts and lady aileen 
roberts made a farewell speech to them in wellington barracks. this 
was the last time that lord roberts saw the battalion of which he was 
the first commanderinchief. 

on the 12th august the battalion entrained for southampton in two 
trains at nine elms station, each detachment being played out of 
barracks to the station by the band. they were short one officer, as 
2nd lieutenant st. j. r. pigott had fallen ill, and an officer just 
gazetted2nd lieutenant sir gerald burke, bart.could not accompany 
them as he had not yet got his uniform. they embarked at southampton 
on a hot still day in the p.  o. s.s. novara. this was a long and 
tiring operation, since every one was new to embarkationduty, and, 
owing to the tide, the ships bulwarks stood twentyfive feet above 
the quay. the work was not finished till 4 p. m. when most of the men 
had been under arms for twelve hours. just before leaving, captain 
sir delves broughton, bart., was taken ill and had to be left behind. 
a telegram was sent to headquarters, asking for captain h. hamilton 
berners to take his place, and the novara cleared at z p. m. as 
dusk fell, she passed h.m.s. formidable off ryde and exchanged 
signals with her. the battleships last message to the battalion 
was to hope that they would get plenty of fighting. many of the 
officers at that moment were sincerely afraid that they might be late 
for the war 

the following is the list of officers who went out with the battalion 
that night 


  lieut.col. hon. g. h. morris          commanding officer. 
  major h. f. crichton                   senior major. 
  captain lord desmond fitzgerald        adjutant. 
  lieut. e. j. f. gough                  transport officer. 
  lieut. e. b. greer                     m. gun officer. 
  hon. lieut. h. hickie                  quartermaster. 
  lieut. h. j. s. shields r.a.m.c.     medical officer. 
  lieut. hon. aubrey herbert, m.p.       interpreter. 


no. 1 company. 

  capt. hon. a. e. mulholland. 
  capt. lord john hamilton. 
  lieut. hon. h. r. alexander. 
  lieut. c. a. s. walker. 
  2nd lieut. n. l. woodroffe. 
  2nd lieut. j. livingstonelearmonth. 


no. 2 company. 

  major h. a. herbert stepney. 
  capt. j. n. guthrie. 
  lieut. e. j. f. gough. 
  lieut. j. s. n. fitzgerald. 
  lieut. w. e. hope. 
  2nd lieut. o. hughesonslow. 


no. 3 company. 

  capt. sir delves broughton, bart. 
      replaced by capt. h. hamilton berners. 
  capt. hon. t. e. vesey. 
  lieut. hon. hugh gough. 
  lieut. lord guernsey. 
  2nd lieut. viscount castlerosse. 


no. 4 company. 

  capt. c. a. tisdall. 
  capt. a. a. perceval. 
  lieut. w. c. n. reynolds. 
  lieut. r. blackerdouglass. 
  lieut. lord robert innesker. 
  2nd lieut. j. t. p. roberts. 


details at the base. 

  capt. lord arthur hay. 
  2nd lieut. sir gerald burke, bart. 

they reached havre at 6 a. m. on august 13, a fiercely hot day, and, 
tired after a sleepless night aboard ship, and a long wait, in a 
hot, tinroofed shed, for some missing men, marched three miles out 
of the town to rest camp no. 2 in a large field at sanvic, a suburb 
of havre at the top of the hill. later, the city herself became 
almost a suburb to the vast restcamps round it. here they received 
an enthusiastic welcome from the french, and were first largely 
introduced to the wines of the country, for many maidens lined the 
steep road and offered bowls of drinks to the wearied. 

next day august 14 men rested a little, looking at this strange, 
bright france with strange eyes, and bathed in the sea and captain 
h. berners, replacing sir delves broughton, joined. at eleven 
oclock they entrained at havre station under secret orders for the 
front. the heat broke in a terrible thunderstorm that soaked the new 
uniforms. the crowded train travelled north all day, receiving great 
welcomes everywhere, but no one knowing what its destination might 
be. after more than seventeen hours slow progress by roads that were 
not revealed then or later, they halted at wassigny, at a quarter to 
eleven on the night of august 15, and, unloading in hot darkness, 
bivouacked at a farm near the station. 

on the morning of august 16 they marched to vadencourt, where, for 
the first time, they went into billets. the village, a collection of 
typical whitewashed tiled houses with a lovely old church in the 
centre, lay out pleasantly by the side of a poplarplanted stream. 
the 2nd coldstream guards were also billeted here the headquarters 
of the 4th guards brigade, the 2nd grenadier guards, and 3rd 
coldstream being at grougis. all supplies, be it noted, came from a 
village of the ominous name of boue, whichas they were to learn 
through the four winters to followmeans mud. 

at vadencourt they lay three days while the men were being inoculated 
against enteric. a few had been so treated before leaving wellington 
barracks, but, in view of the hurried departure, 90 per cent. 
remained to be dealt with. the diary remarks that for two days the 
battalion was not up to much. major h. crichton fell sick here. 

on the 20th august the march towards belgium of the brigade began, 
via etreux and fesmy where lieutenant and quartermaster hickie 
went sick and had to be sent back to railhead to maroilles, where 
the battalion billeted, august 21, and thence, via pont sur sambre 
and hargnies, to la longueville, august 22. here, being then five 
miles east of malplaquet, the battalion heard the first sound of the 
guns of the war, far off not knowing that, at the end of all, they 
would hear them cease almost on that very spot. 

at three oclock in the morning of august 23 the brigade marched 
via riez de lerelle into belgian territory and through blaregnies 
towards mons where it was dimly understood that some sort of battle 
was in the making. but it was not understood that eighty thousand 
british troops with three hundred guns disposed between cond, 
through mons towards binche, were meeting twice that number of 
germans on their front, plus sixty thousand germans with two hundred 
and thirty guns trying to turn their left flank, while a quarter of a 
million germans, with close on a thousand guns, were driving in the 
french armies on the british right from charleroi to namur, across 
the meuse and the sambre. this, in substance, was the situation at 
mons. it supplied a sufficient answer to the immortal question, 
put by one of the pillars of the battalion, a drill sergeant, who 
happened to arrive from home just as that situation had explained 
itself, and found his battalion steadily marching south. fwhats all 
this talk about a retreat? said he, and strictly rebuked the shouts 
of laughter that followed.1 


the retreat from mons 

the brigade was first ordered to take up a position at bois lahant, 
close to the dirtier suburbs of mons which is a fair city on a hill, 
but the order was cancelled when it was discovered that the fifth 
division was already there. eventually, the irish guards were told 
to move from the village of quevy le petit, where they had expected 
to go into billets, to harveng. here they were ordered, with the 2nd 
grenadier guards, to support the fifth division on a chalk ridge 
from harmignies to the mons road, while the other two battalions of 
the brigade the 2nd and 3rd coldstream guards took up position 
northeast of harveng. their knowledge of what might be in front 
of them or who was in support was, naturally, small. it was a hot, 
still evening, no germans were visible, but shrapnel fell ahead of 
the battalion as it moved in artillery formation across the rolling, 
cropped lands. one single farranging rifle bullet landed with a 
phtt in the chalk between two officers, one of whom turning to 
the other laughed and said, ah now we can say we have been under 
fire. a few more shells arrived as the advance to the ridge went 
forward, and the brigade reached the seventh kilometrestone on the 
harmigniesmons road, below the ridge, about 6 p. m. on the 23rd 
august. the irish rifles, commanded by colonel bird, d.s.o., were 
fighting here, and nos. 1 and 2 companies of the irish guards went 
up to reinforce it. this was the first time that the battalion had 
been personally shelled and five men were wounded. the guns ceased 
about dusk, and there was very little fire from the german trenches, 
which were rather in the nature of scratchholes, ahead of them. that 
night, too, was the first on which the troops saw a searchlight used. 
they enjoyed also their first experience of digging themselves in, 
the which they did so casually that veterans of after years would 
hold up that trench as a sample of the valour of ignorance. at 
midnight, the irish rifles were ordered to retire while the irish 
guards covered their retirement but so far they had been in direct 
contact with nothing. 

the battalion heard confusedly of the fall of namur and, it may be 
presumed, of the retirement of the french armies on the right of the 
british. there was little other news of any sort, and what there was, 
not cheering. on front and flank of the british armies the enemy 
stood in more than overwhelming strength, and it came to a question 
of retiring, as speedily as might be, before the flood swallowed what 
remained. so the long retreat of our little army began. 

the large outlines of it are as follows the entire british 
force, first and second army corps, fell back to bavaithe first 
without serious difficulty, the second fighting rearguard actions 
through the day. at bavai the two corps diverged, not to unite 
again till they should reach betz on the 1st september. the second 
army corps, reinforced by the fourth division, took the roads 
through le quesnoy, solesme, le cateau, st. quentin, ham, nesle, 
noyon, and crpyenvalois the first paralleling them, roughly, 
through landrecies, vadencourt, la fre, pasly by soissons, and 
villerscotterts. 

illustration 

  the retreat from mons 
  1914 
  northern section 

  emery walker ltd. del. et sc. 

printed in great britain by emery walker ltd., london 

at 2 oclock in the morning of august 24 the battalion, having 
covered the retirement of all the other troops, retired through 
the position which the 2nd and 3rd coldstream guards had taken up, 
to quevy le petit, where it was ordered, with the 2nd grenadiers, 
to entrench another position north of quevy le petit from the 
third kilometrestone on the genlyquevy le petit road to the tenth 
kilometrestone on the monsbettignies road. this it did while the 
whole of the second division retired through the position at 4 p. 
m., the battalion acting as rearguard. their notion of diggingin 
was to cut firesteps in the side of the handy bank of any road. at 
nine oclock that night the battalion came out of belgium by the 
same road that it had marched into belgium through blaregnies, past 
bavai where the first and second army corps diverged, and through la 
longueville to malgarni, where they bivouacked in an orchard having 
been fortyfour hours under arms. here the first mail from england 
arrived, and was distributed by torchlight under the appletrees in 
the warm night. 

on the afternoon of august 25 the battalion reached landrecies, an 
unlovely, longstreeted town in closely cultivated country. the 
german pressure was heavy behind them, and that evening the 3rd 
coldstream guards on outpost duty to the northwest of landrecies, 
on the mormal road, were attacked, and, as history shows, beat 
off that attack in a nightfight of some splendour. the battalion 
turned out and blocked the pav entrance to the town with improvised 
barricades, which they lined, of stones, tables, chairs, carts, and 
pianos relieved the coldstream at 1.30 a. m., august 26 and once 
again covered the retirement of the brigade out of the town towards 
etreux. the men were very tired, so weary indeed that many of them 
slept by the roadside while waiting to relieve the coldstreams at 
landrecies fight. that night was the first they heard wounded men 
scream. a couple of irish guards officers, sleeping so deeply that 
only the demolition by shellfire of the house next door waked them, 
were left behind here, but after twentyfour hours of fantastic and, 
at that time, almost incredible adventures, rejoined safely next day. 
it was recorded also that one of the regimental drums was seen and 
heard going down landrecies main street in the darkness, strung on 
the foreleg of a gunhorse who had stepped into it as a battery went 
south. a battalion cooker, the sparks flying from it, passed like 
a fireengine hastening to a fire, and men found time to laugh and 
point at the strange thing. 

at etreux, where with the rest of the brigade the battalion 
entrenched itself after the shallow pattern of the time, it had 
its first sight of a german aeroplane which flew over its trenches 
and dropped a bomb that missed a trench by twenty yards. the 
battalion fired at it, and it flew away like a wounded bird and 
eventually came down and was captured by another division. both 
sides were equally inexperienced in those days in the details of 
air war. all that day they heard the sound of what they judged was 
a battle in the direction of le cateau. this was the second army 
corps and a single division of the third corps under smithdorrien 
interrupting our retirement to make a stand against four or more 
german army corps and six hundred guns. the result of that action 
caused the discerning general von kluck to telegraph that he held 
the expeditionary force surrounded by a ring of steel, and berlin 
behung itself with flags. this also the battalion did not know. 
they were more interested in the fact that they had lost touch with 
the second division and that their commanding officer had told the 
officers that, so far as he could make out, they were surrounded and 
had better dig in deeper and wait on. as no one knew particularly 
where they might be in all france, and as the night of the 26th was 
very wet, the tired men slept undisturbedly over the proposition, 
to resume their retreat next day august 2z down the valley of the 
sambre, through vnrolles, tupigny, vadencourt, noyales, to the 
open glaring country round mont dorigny where the broad road to 
st. quentin crosses the river. it was in reserve that day, and the 
next august 28 was advanceguard to the brigade as the retirement 
continued through chtillon, berthenicourt, and moy to vendeuil 
and the crossroads west of the vendeuilla fre road while the 
brigade marched on to bertaucourt. after the brigade had passed, the 
battalion acted as rearguard into bertaucourt. here no. 2 company, 
under major stepney, was sent to beautor to assist a section of the 
royal engineers in demolishing a bridge across the river therean 
operation performed without incidentand in due course joined up 
with the battalion again. by this time, the retreat, as one who 
took part in it says, had become curiously normalthe effect, 
doubtless, of that continued overexertion which reduces men to the 
state of sleepwalkers. there was a ten minutes halt every hour, on 
which the whole battalion dropped where it stood and slept. at night, 
some of them began to see lights, like those of comfortable billets 
by the roadside which, for some curious reason or other, could never 
be reached. others found themselves asleep, on their feet, and even 
when they lay down to snatch sleep, the march moved on, and wearied 
them in their dreams. owing to the heat and the dust, many suffered 
from sore feet and exhaustion, and, since ambulance accommodation was 
limited, they had to be left behind to follow on if, and as best, 
they could. but those who fell out were few, and the diary remarks 
approvingly that on the whole the battalion marched very well and 
marchdiscipline was good. neither brigade nor battalion commanders 
knew anything of what was ahead or behind, but it seemed that, since 
they could not get into paris before the germans and take firstclass 
tickets to london, they would all be cut off and destroyed which did 
not depress them unduly. at all events, the battalion one evening 
forgot its weariness long enough to take part in the chase and 
capture of a stray horse of belgian extraction, which, after its 
ample lack of manners and mouth had been proved, they turned over for 
instruction and reformation to the transport. 

from bertaucourt, then, where the battalion spent another night in 
an orchard, it marched very early on the 30th august to terny via 
deuillet, servais, basse fort de coucy, folembray, coucylechteau, 
then magnificent and untouchedall closer modelled country and, 
if possible, hotter than the bare lands they had left. thence from 
terny to pasly, n.w. of soissons. here they lay down by moonlight in 
a field, and here an officer dreamed that the alarm had been given 
and that they must move on. in this nightmare he rose and woke up all 
platoonofficers and the c.o. next, laboriously and methodically, 
his own company, and last of all himself, whom he found shaking and 
swearing at a man equally drunk with fatigue. 

on the 31st august the battalion took position as right flankguard 
from 9 a. m. to 3 p. m. on the high ground near le murger farm and 
bivouacked at soucy. so far, there had been little fighting for them 
since landrecies, though they moved with the comforting knowledge 
that an unknown number of the enemy, thoroughly provided with means 
of transportation, were in fixed pursuit, just on the edge of a 
skyline full of unseen guns urging the british always to move back. 


villerscotterts 

on the 1st september, the anniversary of sedan, the battalion 
was afoot at 2 a. m. and with the 2nd coldstream guards acted as 
rearguard under the commanding officer, lieut.colonel the hon. g. 
morris. there had been heavy dew in the night, followed at dawn by 
thin, miserable rain, when they breakfasted, among wet lucerne and 
fields of stacked corn, on the edge of the deep villerscotterts 
beechforests. they fell back into them on a rumour of advancing 
cavalry, who turned out to be troops of german infantry running 
from stack to stack and filtering into the forest on their either 
flank. their first position was the vivires puiseux line, a little 
southwest of soucy village the battalion to the right of the 
soucyvillerscotterts road, and the coldstream to the left on a 
front of not more than a mile. their second position, as far as 
can be made out, was the rond de la reine, a mile farther south, 
where the deep soft forestroads from soucy and vivires join on 
their way to villerscotterts. the enemy ran in upon them from 
all sides, and the action resolved itself into blind fighting in 
the gloom of the woods, with occasional glimpses of men crossing 
the rides, or firing from behind treeboles. the germans were very 
cautious at first, because our firediscipline, as we fell back, gave 
them the impression that the forest was filled with machineguns 
instead of mere trained men firing together sustainedly. the morning 
wet cleared, and the day grew close and stifling. there was no 
possibility of keeping touch or conveying orders. since the german 
advanceguard was, by comparison, an army, all that could be done was 
to hold back as long as possible the attacks on front and flank, and 
to retain some sense of direction in the bullettorn woods, where, 
when a man dropped in the bracken and bramble, he disappeared. but 
throughout the fight, till the instant of his death, lieut.colonel 
the hon. g. morris, commanding the battalion, rode from one point 
to another of an action that was all front, controlling, cheering, 
and chaffing his men. and so that heathen battle, in half darkness, 
continued, with all units of the 4th brigade confusedly engaged, 
till in the afternoon the battalion, covered by the 2nd coldstream, 
reformed, still in the woods, a mile north of the village of 
pisseleux. here the roll was called, and it was found that the 
following officers were missing lieut.colonel the hon. g. morris, 
major h. f. crichton, captain c. a. tisdall, lieutenant lord robert 
innesker, 2nd lieutenant viscount castlerosse, lieutenant the hon. 
aubrey herbert, and lieutenant shields, r.a.m.c. 

captain lord desmond fitzgerald and lieutenant blackerdouglass were 
wounded and left with the fieldambulance. lieut.colonel morris, 
major crichton, and captain tisdall had been killed. the others 
had been wounded and captured by the germans, who treated them with 
reasonable humanity at villerscotterts till they were released on 
september 12 by the french advance following the first battle of the 
marne. colonel morriss body was afterwards identified and buried 
with that of captain tisdall and one long rusticfenced grave, 
perhaps the most beautiful of all restingplaces in france, on a 
slope of the forest off the dim road, near the rond de la reine, 
holds our dead in that action. it was made and has been religiously 
tended since by dr. moufflers, the mayor of the town, and his wife. 

the death of colonel morris, an officer beloved and a man noticeably 
brave among brave men, was a heavy loss to the battalion he 
commanded, and whose temper he knew so well. in the thick of the 
fight during a lull in the firing, when some blind shellfire opened, 
he called to the men dyou hear that? theyre doing that to 
frighten you. to which someone replied with simple truth if thats 
what theyre after, they might as well stop. they succeeded with me 
hours ago. 

as a matter of fact, the men behaved serenely, as may be proved 
by this tale. they were working their way, well under riflefire, 
across an opening in the forest, when some of them stopped to pick 
blackberries that attracted their attention. to these their sergeant, 
very deliberately, said i shouldnt mind them berries, lads. 
theres may be worrums in em. it was a speech worthy of a hero 
of dumas, whose town villerscotterts is, by right of birth. yet 
once, during their further retirement towards pisseleux, they were 
badly disconcerted. a curious private prodded a hornets nest on a 
branch with his bayonet, and the inhabitants came out in force. then 
there was real confusion not restored by the sight of baldheaded 
reservists frantically slapping with their caps at one hornet while 
others stung them on their defenceless scalps. so they passed out of 
the darkness and the greenery of the forest, which, four years later, 
was to hide a great french army, and launch it forth to turn the 
tide of 1918. 

their march continued until 11 p. m. that night, when the battalion 
arrived at betz, where the first and second army corps rejoined 
each other once more. no supplies were received that night nor the 
following day september 2, when the battalion reached esbly, where 
they bathedwith soap, be it notedin the broad and quiet marne, 
and an ox was requisitioned, potatoes were dug up from a field, and 
some sort of meal served out. 

the diary here notes thus ended the retreat from mons. this is not 
strictly correct. in twelve days the british army had been driven 
back 140 miles as the crow flies from mons, and farther, of course, 
by road. there was yet to be a further retirement of some fifteen 
miles south of esbly ere the general advance began, but september 3 
marks, as nearly as may be, slackwater ere the ebb that followed 
of the triumphant german tidal wave through belgium almost up to 
the outer forts of paris. that advance had, at the last moment, 
swerved aside from paris towards the southeast, and in doing so had 
partially exposed its right flank to the sixth french army. general 
joffre took instant advantage of the false step to wheel his sixth 
army to the east, so that its line ran due north and east from 
ermenonville to lagny at the same time throwing forward the left of 
his line. the british force lay between lagny and cortecan, filling 
the gap between the sixth and fifth french armies, and was still an 
effective weapon which the enemy supposed they had broken for good. 
but our harried men realized no more than that, for the moment, there 
seemed to be a pause in the steady going back. the confusion, the 
dust, the heat, continued while the armies manuvred for position 
and scouts and aerial reconnaissance reported more and more german 
columns of all arms pressing down from the east and northeast. 

on september 3 the 4th brigade moved from esbly, in the great loops 
of the marne, through meaux to the neighbourhood of pierre leve, 
where the battalion fed once more on requisitioned beef, potatoes, 
and apples. 


the advance to the aisne 

next day september 4, while the british army was getting into 
position in the process of changing front to the right, the 4th 
brigade had to cover a retirement of the 5th brigade between pierre 
leve and le bertrand, and the battalion dug itself in near a farm 
grand loge on the pierre levegiremoutiers road in preparation for 
a rearguard attack that did not arrive. they remained in position 
with what the diary pathetically refers to as the machinegun, till 
they were relieved in the evening by the worcesters, and reached 
bivouac at le bertrand at one oclock on the morning of the 5th 
september. that day they bivouacked near fontenay, and picked up some 
muchneeded messtins, boots, putties and the like with which to make 
good more immediate waste. 

on the 6th they marched through rozoy where they saw an old priest 
standing at the door of his church, and to him the men bared their 
heads mechanically, till he, openly surprised, gave them his 
blessing to mont plaisir to gain touch between the first and second 
divisions of the english army. major stepney, the c.o., reported to 
headquarters 1st brigade at 9 a. m. half a mile northeast of rozoy. 
at the same moment cavalry scouts brought news of two enemy columns, 
estimated at a thousand each, approaching from the direction of 
vaudoy. nos. 3 and 4 companies were ordered forward to prolong the 
line of the first division, while nos. 1 and 2 companies with the 
machinegun entrenched themselves on the mont plaisir road. 

illustration 

  the retreat from mons 
  1914 
  southern section. 

  emery walker ltd. del. et sc. 

printed in great britain by emery walker ltd., london 

in the afternoon lieutenant the hon. r. h. alexander, reconnoitring 
with a platoon in the direction of the village of villeneuve, which 
was to be occupied, reported a hostile battery at le plessis had 
fired on the battalion and killed 4 men and wounded 11. one of these, 
sergeant oloughlin, died later. this was the battalions first 
fighting since villerscotterts, and they went into action while 
the bells of the quiet countryside rang for church. the battery was 
put out of action by our guns in half an hour, villeneuve occupied 
without further opposition, and the battalion bivouacked at tonquin 
on the night of the 6th september. the enemy had realised the threat 
to their flank in general joffres new dispositions, and under cover 
of rearguard and delaying actions were withdrawing north all along 
their line. 

on the zth september the battalion made a forced march from tonquin 
to rebais, where there was a german column, but the advanceguard of 
the brigade was held up at st. simeon till dark and the battalion 
had to bivouac a couple of miles outside rebais. the german force 
withdrew from rebais on the afternoon of the zth, and on the 8th the 
brigades advance continued through rebais northward in the direction 
of boitron, which lay just across the petit morin river. heavy 
machinegun fire from some thick woods along the rolling ground, 
across the river, checked the advanceguard the 3rd coldstream and 
the two companies of the irish guards who supported them. the woods, 
the river valley, and the village of boitron were searched by our 
guns, and on the renewal of the attack the river was crossed and 
boitron occupied, the enemy being heavily shelled as he retired. here 
the battalion reformed and pressed forward in a heavy rainstorm, 
through a flank attack of machineguns from woods on the left. these 
they charged, while a battery of our fieldguns fired pointblank 
into the thickets, and captured a german machinegun company of six 
guns which seemed to them, at the time, a vast number, 3 officers, 
and 90 rank and file. here, too, in the confusion of the fighting 
they came under fire of our own artillery, an experience that was 
to become familiar to them, and the c.o. ordered the companies 
to assemble at ferme le cas rouge, a village near by where they 
bivouacked for the night. they proudly shut up in the farmyard the 
first prisoners they had ever taken told off two servants to wait 
upon a wounded major took the parole of the two other officers and 
invited them to a dinner of chicken and red wine. the battalion, 
it will be observed, knew nothing then except the observances of 
ordinary civilized warfare. 2nd lieutenant a. fitzgerald and a draft 
arrived that day. 

this small affair of boitron wood was the irish guards share of the 
immense mixed battle of the marne, now raging along all the front. 
its result and the capture of the machineguns cheered them a little. 

the next five daysseptember 9 to 13had nothing but tedious 
marching and more tedious halts and checks, due to the congestion 
of traffic and the chaos in the villages that had been entered, 
sacked, defiled and abandoned by the enemy. the marne was crossed 
on the 9th at charly, wherethe inhabitants said that the germans 
detailed for the job had been too drunk to effect ita bridge had 
been left ready for demolition, but intact, and by this means the 
first and second divisions crossed the river. the weather turned wet, 
with heavy showers greatcoats had been lost or thrown aside all 
along the line of retreat billets and bivouacs made filthy by the 
retreating germans and there was general discomfort, enlivened with 
continuous cannonading from the front and the appearance of german 
prisoners gathered in by our cavalry ahead. and thus, from the marne 
the battalion came by way of trenel, villerssurmarne, cointicourt, 
oulchylechteau, courcelles and st. mard to the high banks of the 
aisne, which they crossed by the pontoon bridge at pont darcy on the 
morning of september 14 and advanced to soupir in the hollows under 
the steep wooded hills. 

that day, the 2nd grenadiers formed the advanceguard of the 
brigade, followed by the 3rd coldstream, the irish guards, and the 
2nd coldstream. after they had cleared soupir village, the force 
was shelled and an attack was made by the 3rd coldstream, the irish 
guards in support, on a steep ridge near la cour de soupir farm, 
which stood on the crest of the bluff above the river. the heavily 
wooded country was alive with musketry and machinegun fire, and the 
distances were obscured by mist and heavy rain. the 3rd coldstream, 
attacking the farm, found themselves outflanked from a ridge on their 
right, which was then attempted by three companies of the irish 
guards. they reached to within a couple of hundred yards of a wood 
cut up by rides, down which, as well as from the trenches, heavy 
riflefire was directed. here captain j. n. guthrie no. 2 company 
was wounded and captain h. hamilton berners killed, while lieutenant 
watson, r.a.m.c., was shot and wounded at close quarters attending 
a wounded man. here, too, the battalion had its first experience of 
the german use of the white flag for lieutenant j. s. fitzgerald 
with no. 8 platoon and a party of coldstream under lieutenant 
cottereldormer found some hundred and fifty germans sitting round 
haystacks and waving white flags. they went forward to take their 
surrender and were met by a heavy fire at thirty yards range, 
which forced them to fall back. lieutenant e. b. greer, machinegun 
officer, now brought up his two machineguns, but was heavily fired 
at from cover, had all of one gunteam killed or wounded and, for the 
while, lost one gun. he reorganized the other gunteam, and called 
for volunteers from the company nearest him to recover it. after dark 
corporal sheridan and private carney of no. 3 company and private 
harrington, a machinegunner of no. 1 company, went out with him and 
the gun was brought in. a further advance was made in the afternoon 
to the edge of the wood in order to clear out the snipers who held it 
and commanded the cultivated fields outside. towards dusk, captain 
lord guernsey, who was acting quartermaster, reported himself to the 
c.o., who posted him to no. 2 company, then engaged in clearing out 
the snipers, in place of captain guthrie, who had been wounded. he 
went forward to assist captain lord arthur hay in command, and both 
were immediately shot dead. 

the battalion bivouacked in battleoutpost formation that night 
on the edge of the wood, and got into touch with the 60th rifles 
on their right and the 2nd grenadiers on their left. here, though 
they did not know it, the advance from the marne was at an end. our 
forces had reached the valley of the aisne, with its bluffs on either 
side and deep roads half hidden by the woods that climbed them. 
the plateaux of the north of the river shaped themselves for the 
trenchwarfare of the years to come and the natural strength of the 
positions on the high ground was increased by numberless quarries and 
caves that ran along it. 


the halt at soupir 

on the 15th september patrols reported that the enemy had fallen back 
a little from his position, and at daylight two companies entrenched 
themselves on the edge of the wood. judged by present standards those 
trenches were little more than shallow furrows, for we did not know 
that the day of open battle was ended, and it is curious to see how 
slowly our people broke themselves to the monotonous business of 
trench construction and maintenance. even after they had dug the 
casual ditch which they called a trench, it cost some time and a few 
lives till they understood that the works could not be approached in 
the open as had been wars custom. their first communicationtrench 
was but three hundred yards long, and it struck them as a gigantic 
and almost impossible fatigue. 

the enemy had not fallen back more than a thousand yards from the 
cour de soupir farm which they were resolute to retake if possible. 
they fired on our buryingparties and shelled the trenches all 
through the 16th september. patrols were sent out at dawn and 
dusksince any one visible leaving the trenches was fired upon by 
snipersfound hostile infantry in full strength in front of them, 
and the battalion had to organize its first system of trenchrelief 
for the diary of the 18th september remarks that nos. 1 and 4 
companies relieved 2 and 3 companies in the trenches and were again 
shelled during the day. 

sniping on hun lines was a novel experience to the battalion. they 
judged it strange to find a man apparently dead, with a cloth over 
his face, lying in a hollow under a ridge commanding their line, who 
turned out to be quite alive and unwounded. his rifle was within 
short reach, and he was waiting till our patrols had passed to get to 
his work. but they killed him, angrily and with astonishment. 

on the morning of the 18th september lieut.colonel lord ardee, 
grenadier guards, arrived and took over command from major stepney. 
the following officersthe first of the long linealso arrived as 
reinforcements 

major g. madden captain norman orrewing, scots guards, attached 
captain lord francis scott, grenadier guards, attached captain the 
hon. j. f. trefusis, lieutenants george brooke, l. s. coke, r. h. 
ferguson, g. m. maitland, c. r. harding, and p. antrobus. 

the battalion reorganized as follows after less than four weeks 
campaign 

  lieut.colonel lord ardee        c.o. 
  major herbert stepney            senior major. 
  capt. the hon. j. trefusis       adjutant. 
  lieut. e. j. gough               transport officer. 
  lieut. c. a. s. walker           quartermaster acting. 
  capt. hon. a. e. mulholland      o.c. no. 1 company. 
  capt. n. orrewing               o.c. no. 2 company. 
  capt. lord francis scott         o.c. no. 3 company. 
  major g. madden                  o.c. no. 4 company. 

the trenchwar was solidifying itself for the diary of that same day 
notes that the enemy shelled the trenches and the two howitzerguns 
which were in position below. ours was an army, then, which could 
count and place every gun that it owned. as many as three howitzer 
batteries per division had accompanied the expeditionary force, and 
more were being sent from home. 

the night of the 19th was very wet. they were relieved by the 3rd 
coldstream, and went into billets at soupir, having been in the 
trenches for five days. there was an alarm in the afternoon, and 
the machineguns and 100 men of no. 1 company were sent to help the 
coldstream in the trenches, whilst the rest of the battalion marched 
at 6 p. m. to be ready to assist the 2nd grenadiers on the left of 
cour de soupir farm. only the machineguns, however, came into 
action, and the battalion returned to its billets at 10 p. m. 

much the same sort of thing occurred on the 20tha furious fusillade 
from the trenches, the despatch of reinforcements up a muddy 
lane, not yet turned into a communicationtrench, to help the 3rd 
coldstream, while nos. 2 and 4 companies went out to reinforce the 
oxfordshire light infantry and to hold the road at the back of it 
in case of a retirement, and the rest of the battalion with the 
machineguns stayed as a reserve in soupir marketsquare. but beyond 
shrapnel bursting over the village and the wounding of two men by 
stray machinegun bullets, there were no special incidents. major g. 
madden this day had to return to england, ill. 

on the 21st the battalion relieved the 2nd grenadiers on the left 
at soupir farm at 3.30 a. m.the safest hour, as experience was to 
prove, for reliefs. nos. 2 and 3 companies were in trenches, and nos. 
1 and 4 about 300 yards in the rear, with the headquarters in one of 
the caves, which are a feature of the country. the word dugout had 
not yet been invented. the nearest approach to it is a reference in 
a private letter to a shelterrecess in the side of the trench to 
protect one from shrapnel. the diary marks that the usual alarms 
occurred at 6.30 when the patrol went out and the enemy fired a good 
deal of shrapnel without effect. soupir, like many french villages, 
was full of carefully planted spies of singular audacity. one was 
found in an officers room. he had appeared from a cellar, alleging 
that he was an invalid, but as the gunners telephonewires near the 
cellar had been cut and our movements had been reported to the enemy 
with great regularity, his explanation was not accepted, nor were his 
days long in that land. 

patrols, too, were elastic affairs. one of them, under lieutenant r. 
h. ferguson, went out on the night of the 21st, came on the enemys 
trenches half a mile out, lay down to listen to the conversation 
there, were all but cut off by a wandering section of snipers, and 
returned to their lines unmolested, after the lieutenant had shot the 
leading pursuer with his revolver. 

on the 22nd september the battalionboth entrenched and in reserve 
in the caves behindexperienced four hours highexplosive howitzer 
fire, which except for the effect on the nerves did very little 
damage. they had yet to learn what continuous noise could do to 
break mens nerve. this was followed by a heavy fusillade, varied by 
starshells, rockets, and searchlights, which lasted intermittently 
throughout the night. the rocketdisplay was new to the men. 
searchlights, we know, they had seen before. 

on the 23rd a telephoneline between battalion headquarters and 
the advanced trenches was installed for the first time. nos. 2 
and 3 companies relieved nos. 1 and 4 in the trenches, and a man 
bringing back a message from no. 4 company was killed by a sniper. 
the battalion was relieved by the 3rd coldstream in the evening and 
returned to its billets in the barns and lofts of soupir village, 
where next day september 24 the diary observes they spent a quiet 
morning. the men got washed and shaved, and company officers were 
able to get at their companies. there are so many new officers who 
do not know their men that any rest day should be made use of in 
this manner. they relieved the 3rd coldstream again that evening, 
and digging operations to improve existing trenches and make 
communicationtrenches were at once begun. here is the first direct 
reference in the diary to communicationtrenches, as such. 

snipers were active all through the 25th september. the trenches were 
heavily shelled in the afternoon, and one man was hit in the leg 
while going to fetch water. they returned to soupir in the evening 
and spent the 26th standing to, in anticipation of enemy attacks 
which did not develop into anything more than an artillery duel, and 
in digging trenches for the defence of soupir village. this work, 
however, had to be stopped owing to heavy shellfire brought to bear 
on the workingpartiespresumably through information from the many 
spiesand after a wearing day relieved the 3rd coldstream in the 
trenches at night. the diary gives no hint of the tremendous strain 
of those twentyfour hours reliefs from being shelled in a trench 
to being shelled in a village, nor of the inadequacy of our artillery 
as it strove to cope with the german guns, nor of the rasping 
irritation caused by the knowledge that every disposition made was 
reported almost at once to the enemy. 

on september 2za sundaythe enemys bands were heard playing up 
and down the trenches. some attempt was made by a british battalion 
on the right to move out a patrol covered by the fire of no. 2 
company, but the enemy shells and machineguns smothered every 
movement. 

on the 28th september their day in billets stakes were cut out of 
the woods behind soupir, while the pioneers collected what wire they 
could lay hands on, as the battalion was ordered to construct wire 
entanglements in front of their trenches tonight. the entanglements 
were made of two or three strands, at the most, of agricultural 
wire picked up where they could find it. they heard heavy fighting 
throughout the night on their rightprobably the first division. 
both sides by now were feeling the strain of trenchwork, for which 
neither had made preparations, and the result was an increasing 
tension manifesting itself in wild outbursts of musketry and 
artillery and camp rumour of massed attacks and breaksthrough. 

on the 30th september, f.m. lord robertss birthday, a 
congratulatory telegram was sent to him and a great quantity of 
material was collected out of which huts for the men could be built. 
these were frail affairs of straw and twig, half dug in, half built 
out, of the nearest banks, or placed under the lee of any available 
shelter. the very fabric of them has long since been overlaid with 
strata of fresh wreckage and the twig roofs and sides are rotted 
black under the grass or ploughed in. 

the month closes with the note that, as it was a very bright 
moonlight night, the battalions usual relief of the coldstream was 
carried out up the communicationtrenches. some men still recall 
that first clumsy trenchrelief. 

october 1 was spent in perfecting communicationtrenches and 
shelters, and the brigadier came up in the morning and was taken 
round the trenches. two officers were sent to chavonne to meet the 
5th brigadeone to bring the worcesters to the battalions trenches, 
the other to show the connaught rangers their billets in soupir. the 
3rd coldstream marched out of soupir and took up the line to the left 
of the 2nd grenadiers near vailly, and next day, 2nd october, no. 1 
company of the irish guards dug a connectingtrench between those 
two. otherwise, for the moment, life was smooth. 

it may be noted for the instruction of generations to come that 
some of the reservists grumbled at orders not to talk or smoke 
in the trenches, as that drew fire and that a newly appointed 
platoonofficer, when he had admonished them officially, fell them 
out and informed them unofficially that, were there any more trouble, 
he would, after the c.o. had dealt with the offenders, take them on 
for three rounds boxing in public. peace and goodwill returned at 
once. 

on the 3rd october, a platoon was despatched to help the royal 
engineers in the construction of a road across a new bridge they 
had put up between soupir and chavonne. the battalion relieved the 
3rd coldstream in its new position threequarters of a mile east 
of vailly, and next day quietly improved trenches and headcover, 
which latter is mentioned for the first time. it was all casual 
timber picked up off the countryside. 

on the 5th october a patrol explored through the wood, in front of 
the right trenches, but found only dead germans to the number of 
thirty and many half buried, as well as five british soldiers killed 
in some lost affair of a fortnight before. private oshaughnessy, 
no. 1 company, was shot dead by a sniper when on observationpost 
at the end of this wood. he had only arrived that morning with a 
draft of one hundred men, under lieutenant gorelangton, and had 
asked to be allowed to go out on this duty. in the afternoon three 
shells burst on the road near battalion headquarters, and fatally 
wounded lieutenant g. brooke, who was on his way to soupir to take 
over the transport from lieutenant e. j. gough. he was sent in to 
braisne, where he died on the zth october. the diary notes he 
would not have been found so soon had not the shells broken the 
telephonewire to headquarters. a message was coming through at the 
time and when communication was stopped the signalling sergeant 
sent two men to repair the wire and they found him. he was brought 
in to the a.d.s. at vaillysuraisne by his own men, who made the 
r.a.m.c. stretcherbearers walk behind as they would allow none but 
themselves to carry him. they bade him farewell before they returned 
to their trenches, and went out openly weeping. when he was sent to 
braisne that evening, after being dressed, his own men again got an 
ambulance across the pontoonbridge, which had been hitherto reckoned 
impassable, for his convenience. his last words to them were that 
they were to play the game and not to revenge his death on the hun. 

on the afternoon of the 6th october, which was cold and misty, the 
germans pushed a patrol through the wood and our standingpatrol went 
out and discovered one german underofficer of the 64th imperial 
jger guards dead, and the rifle of another man. 

the enemy sent out no more patrols. men had grown to be cunning 
among the timber, and noticed every tree they moved under. when the 
coldstream relieved the battalion that night, one of our patrols 
found a felled tree had been carefully placed across their homeward 
path by some unknown handit might have been the late jger 
underofficerwho had expected to attack the patrol while it was 
climbing over the obstacle. 

on the zth the battalion rested in soupir all day, and on the 8th 
lieutenant g. brookes body was brought in from braisne and buried in 
soupir cemetery. 

the 9th was a quiet day except for an hours shelling, and a good 
deal of cheering from the german trenches in the evening, evidently 
in honour of the fall of antwerp. it annoyed our men for the reason 
that they could not retaliate. our guns had not a round to throw away. 


the move toward the sea 

the opposing lines had been locked now for close upon a month and, 
as defences elaborated themselves, all hope of breakingthrough 
vanished. both sides then opened that mutually outflanking movement 
towards the west which did not end till it reached the sea. held up 
along their main front, the germans struck at the flanders plain, the 
allies striving to meet the movement and envelop their right flank as 
it extended. a british force had been sent to antwerp the seventh 
division and the third cavalry division had been landed at zeebrugge 
on the zth october with the idea of helping either the antwerp force 
or cooperating with the allied armies as circumstances dictated. 
meantime, the main british force was being held in the trenches of 
the aisne a hundred and twenty miles away and it seemed good to 
all concerned that these two bodies of british troops should be 
consolidated, both for purposes of offence, command and, by no means 
least, supply, on the flanders flank covering the channel. there 
were obvious dangers in moving so many men from high ground across a 
broad river under the enemys eye. it could only be effected at night 
with all precautions, but as the western pressure developed and was 
accentuated by the fall of antwerp, the advantage of the transfer 
outweighed all risk. our cavalry moved on the 3rd october by road 
for flanders, and a few days later the infantry began to entrain for 
st. omer. the second corps was the first to leave, the third corps 
followed, and the first was the last. 

orders came to the battalion on sunday, october 11, to be prepared 
to move at short notice, and new clothes were issued to the men, but 
they did not hand over their trenches to the french till the 13th 
october, when they marched to perles in the evening and entrained on 
the 14th at fismes a little after noon, reaching hazebrouck via 
the route is worth recording mareuilsurourcq, ormoy, st. denis, 
outside paris, epluches, creil, amiens 10.15 p. m., abbeville 3.15 
a. m., etaples, boulogne, calais and st. omer, every stone of which 
last six was to be as familiar to them as their own hearths for years 
to come. 

at 5 p. m. on the 15th the battalion went into billets at hazebrouck. 
it was a sharp change from the soft wooded bluffs and clean chalky 
hills above the aisne, to the slow ditchlike streams and crowded 
farming landscape of flanders. at hazebrouck they lay till the 
morning of the 1zth, when they marched to boeschepe, attended church 
parade on sunday the 18th, and marched to untouched ypres via st. 
kokebeele, reninghelst and vlamertinghe on the 20th with the brigade, 
some divisional troops and the 41st battery, r.f.a. the brigade 
halted at ypres a few hours, seeing and being impressed by the beauty 
of the cloth hall and the crowded marketplace. the 2nd coldstream 
and the 2nd battalion grenadiers being eventually sent forward, 
the remainder of the brigade billeted in st. jean, then described 
impersonally as a small village about one and a half kilometres east 
of ypres. they halted at the edge of the city for dinner, and the 
men got out their melodeons and danced jigs on the flawless pav. 
much firing was heard all day, and the 2nd coldstream came into 
action about 4 p. m. and remained in the trenches all night. 

that was the sum of information available at the moment to the 
battalionthat, and orders to drive the enemy back wherever 
met. so they first were introduced to the stage of the bloody and 
debatable land which will be known for all time as the salient. 

the original intention of our army on the flanders flank had been 
offensive, but the long check on the aisne gave the enemy time to 
bring forward troops from their immense and perfectly prepared 
reserves, while the fall of antwerpsmall wonder the germans had 
cheered in their trenches when the news camereleased more. 
consequently, the movement that began on the allies side as an 
attempt to roll up the german right flank before it could reach the 
sea, ended in a desperate defence to hold back an overwhelmingly 
strong enemy from sweeping forward through belgium to calais and the 
french seaboard. out of this defence developed that immense and 
overlapping series of operations centring on ypres, extending from 
the yser canal in the north to la basse in the south, and lasting 
from midoctober to the 20th november 1914, which may be ranked as 
the first battle of ypres. 

it will be remembered that the second and third british army corps 
were the first to leave the aisne trenches for the west. on the 11th 
october the second army corps was in position between the aire and 
bthune and in touch with the left flank of the tenth french army at 
la basse. 

on the 12th of october the third army corps reached st. omer and 
moved forward to hazebrouck to get touch with the second army corps 
on its right, the idea being that the two corps together should wheel 
on their own left and striking eastward turn the position of the 
german forces that were facing the tenth french army. they failed 
owing to the strength of the german forces on the spot, and by 
october 19, after indescribably fierce fighting, the second and third 
army corps had been brought to a standstill on a line, from la basse 
through armentires, not noticeably differing from the position which 
our forces were destined to occupy for many months to come. the 
attempted flank attacks had become frontal all along the line, and in 
due course frontal attacks solidified into trenchwarfare again. 

north of armentires the situation had settled itself in much the 
same fashion, flank attacks being outflanked by the extension of the 
enemys line, with strenuous frontal attacks of his daily increasing 
forces. 

the seventh divisionthe first half of the fourth army 
corpsreached ypres from dixmude on the 14th october after its 
unsuccessful attempt to relieve antwerp. as the first army corps had 
not yet come up from the aisne, this division was used to cover the 
british position at ypres from the north the infantry lying from 
zandvoorde, on the southeast, through zonnebeke to langemarck on 
the northwest. here again, through lack of numbers and artillery 
equipment, the british position was as serious as in the south. enemy 
forces, more numerous than the british and belgian armies, combined, 
were bearing down on the british line from the eastward through 
courtrai, iseghem, and roulers, and over the lys bridge at menin. 
later on, it was discovered that these represented not less than five 
new army corps. the seventh division was ordered to move upon menin, 
to seize the bridge over the river and thus check the advance of 
further reinforcements. there were, of course, not enough troops for 
the work, but on the 18th october the division, the right centre of 
which rested on the ypresmenin road, not yet lined throughout with 
dead, wheeled its left the 22nd brigade forward. as the advance 
began, the cavalry on the left became aware of a large new german 
force on the left flank of the advance, and fighting became general 
all along the line of the division. 

on the 19th october the airmen reported the presence of two fresh 
army corps on the left. no further advance being possible, the 
division was ordered to fall back to its original line, an operation 
attended with heavy loss under constant attacks. 

on the 20th october the pressure increased as the german army corps 
made themselves felt against the thin line held by the seventh 
division, which was not amply provided with heavy batteries. 
their losses were largely due to artillery fire, directed by 
airobservation, that obliterated trenches, men, and machineguns. 

on the 21st october the enemy attacked the division throughout the 
day, artillery preparations being varied by mass assaults, but still 
the division endured in the face of an enemy at least four times 
as strong and constantly reinforced. it is, as one writer says, 
hardly conceivable that our men could have checked the enemys 
advance for even a day longer, had it not been for the arrival at 
this juncture of the first army corps. reinforcements were urgently 
needed at every point of the british line, but, for the moment, the 
imminent danger lay to the north of ypres, where fresh german forces, 
underestimated as usual, might sweep the belgian army aside and 
enter the channel ports in our rear. with this in mind, the british 
commanderinchief decided to use the first army corps to prolong the 
british line, already, as it seemed, nearly worn through, toward the 
sea, rather than to strengthen any occupied sector. he posted it, 
thereforeuntil french reinforcements should arriveto the north, 
or left of the seventh division, from zonnebeke to bixschoote. 

our front at that date ran from hollebeke to bixschoote, a distance, 
allowing for bends, of some sixteen miles. to protect this we had but 
three depleted infantry divisions and two cavalry brigades against 
opposed forces of not less than a hundred thousand. moreover, the 
ground was hampered by the flight, from roulers and villages in 
german possession, of refugees, of whom a percentage were certainly 
spies, but over whom it was impossible to exercise any control. they 
carried their goods in little carts drawn by dogs, and they wept and 
wailed as they straggled past our men. 


the salient and the first battle of ypres 

the orders for the guards brigade on october 21 to drive back the 
enemy wherever met were not without significance. all their news 
in billets had been of fresh formations coming down from the north 
and the east, and it was understood that the germans counted with 
confidence upon entering calais, via ypres, in a few days. 

the brigade, less the 2nd coldstream, assembled in a field about 
four kilometres along the ypreszonnebeke road, and after a wait 
of three hours no. 4 company of the 1st irish guards advanced to 
the support of the 2nd grenadiers, who had been ordered to prolong 
the line to the right of the 2nd coldstream. this company and both 
the advanced battalions suffered somewhat severely from shellfire 
and occasional sniping. thus coldly does the diary enter upon 
what was in fact the first day of the first battle of ypres, in 
which companies had to do the work of battalions, and battalions of 
brigades, and whose only relief was a change of torn and bloodsoaked 
ground from one threatened sector of the line to the next. 

it was not worth while to record how the people of ypres brought hot 
coffee to the battalion as it passed through, the day before october 
20 and how, when they halted there a few hours, the men amused 
their hosts by again dancing irish jigs on the clattering pavements 
while the refugees clattered past or how it was necessary to warn 
the companies that the enemy might attack behind a screen of belgian 
women and childrenin which case the battalion would have to fire 
through them. 

on the evening of the 21st october the battalion was ordered up to 
the support of what was left of the 22nd brigade which had fallen 
back to zonnebeke. it came under a heavy burst of artillery 
fire and was forced to lie down in a ploughed field for fifteen 
minutesat that time a novel experience. on its way a hare started 
up which was captured by a man of no. 2 company to the scandal of 
discipline and the delight of all, and later sold for five shillings. 
at zonnebeke it found no. 4 company already lining the main road on 
the left of the town and took up a position in extended order on its 
right, thus establishing the line into zonnebeke. the casualties, 
in spite of the artillery fire, are noted as only one killed and 
seven wounded, which must have been far under the mark. the night 
was lit by the flames of burning houses, by which light they hunted 
for snipers in haystacks round the village, buried stray dead of a 
battalion of the seventh division which had left them and, by order, 
did a deal of futile diggingin. 

the next day the 22nd brigade retired out of zonnebeke about a 
kilometre down the main road to ypres, the battalion and half the 
2nd coldstream conforming to the movement. this enabled the germans 
to enter the north of zonnebeke and post machineguns in some of the 
houses. none the less, our patrols remained in the south end of the 
town and did excellent work an officers patrol, under lieutenant 
ferguson, capturing three mounted orderlies. one man was killed and 
8 wounded in the battalion that day. 

on the 23rd october the enemy brought up more machineguns and 
used them against us energetically all the day. a platoon of no. 
1 company, under lieutenant the hon. h. alexander, attempted an 
outflanking movement through zonnebeke, towards the church, supported 
by a platoon of no. 4 company, under lieutenant w. c. n. reynolds, 
in the course of which the latter officer was wounded. the trenches 
were shelled with shrapnel all the afternoon, and a german advance 
was sprayed down with our riflefire. in the evening the french made 
an attack through zonnebeke helped by their .z5s and established 
themselves in the town. they also, at 9 p. m., relieved the battalion 
which moved at once southwest to zillebeke and arrived there at 
2 a. m. on the morning of the 24th, when it billeted chiefly in a 
brickyard ready to be used afresh. 

the relieving troops were a division of the ninth french army 
corps. they took over the line of our second division, while our 
second division in turn took over part of the front of the seventh 
division. at the same time french territorials relieved our first 
division between bixschoote and langemarck, thus freeing us of all 
responsibility for any ground north of the ypreszonnebeke road. our 
army on the 24th october, then, stood as follows from the zonnebeke 
road to a point near the racecourse in the historic polygon wood 
west of reutel was the second division on its right, up to the menin 
road, lay the first division and from the menin road to zandvoorde 
the seventh division with the 3rd cavalry brigade in the zandvoorde 
trenches. our line had thus been shortened and strengthened but the 
enemy were continuously receiving reinforcements from roulers and 
menin, and the pressure never ceased. 

in the early morning of the 24th october, and before the transfer 
of all the troops had been effected, the british ypres front was 
attacked throughout in force and once more the shock of the attack 
fell on the remains of the seventh division. reserves there were 
none each battalion stood where it was in the flood and fought on 
front, flank, and rear indifferently. the irish guards had a few 
hours rest in the brickfields at zillebeke, where, by some miracle, 
it found its mail of homeletters and parcels waiting for it. even 
before it could open them it was ordered out from zillebeke2 along 
the ypresmenin road to hooge to help the 20th brigade seventh 
division, which had been attacked on the morning of the 25th 
october, and parties of the enemy were reported to have broken 
through into polygon wood. 

illustration 

  the ypres salient 
  first battalion actions 

  emery walker ltd. del. et sc. 

printed in great britain by emery walker ltd., london 

that attack, however, was repulsed during the day, and in the evening 
the battalion was despatched to act in support of the 5th brigade 
near racecourse polygon wood, due north of veldhoek, where the 
battalion bivouacked for the night in a ploughed field. this was the 
first time it had marched up the menin road or seen the chteau of 
hooge, of which now no trace remains, sitting stately among its lawns. 

on the 25th october, after a heavy bombardment, as bombardments were 
then reckoned, the whole division was ordered at dawn to advance 
against reutel the 2nd grenadier guards and the irish guards being 
given the work of clearing out polygon wood, of which the enemy 
held the upper half. they were advancing through the woods, and the 
trenches of the worcester battalion there, when a big shell burst 
in lieutenant fergusons platoon, no. 3 company, killing 4 and 
wounding 9 men, as far as was known. ferguson himself, knocked down 
but unwounded, went back to advise no. 2 company coming up behind 
him to deviate a little, for the ground was a slaughterhouse. 
the battalion fought its way to a couple of hundred yards north of 
reutel and was then brought under heavy riflefire from concealed 
trenches on a ridge. the 2nd grenadiers on the right had, earlier, 
been held up by a german trench on their left, and, as dark came 
on, touch between the battalions there was lost, and the patrol 
sent out to regain it only stumbled on the german trench. the left 
of the battalion lost touch by nearly a quarter of a mile with the 
5th brigade, and as the wet night closed in they found themselves 
isolated in darkness and dripping autumn undergrowth, with the old 
orders to hold ground gained at all costs. meantime they hung 
with both flanks in the air and enemy patrols on either side. the 
nearest supports of any kind were the trenches of the worcesters, 
six hundred yards behind, through the woods so the battalion linked 
up with them by means of a double front of men, back to back, strung 
out tailwise from their bivouac to the worcesters. the manuvre 
succeeded. there was sniping all night from every side, but thanks to 
the faithful tail the enemy could not get round the battalion to 
make sure whether it was wholly in the air. the casualties this day 
were reported as 4 killed and 23 wounded. 

at 4 a. m. on the 26th october, just after the nights rain had 
ceased, word came from brigade headquarters that the 3rd coldstream 
were to be expected on the battalions right. they arrived an hour 
and a half later and the battalion attacked, again to be held up in 
a salient heavily enfiladed from every angle by machineguns, and 
though no. 2 company carried a couple of farmhouses outside the 
woods, they were forced to retire from one of them and lost heavily. 
an attack by the 6th brigade in the afternoon relieved the pressure 
a little, and helped the battalion to get in touch with, at least, 
its brigade. lieutenant shields r.a.m.c. attached was killed here 
while attending our wounded. he had been remonstrated with only a 
few minutes before for exposing himself too much, and paid as much 
heed to the rebuke as did the others who succeeded him in his office. 
the casualties for the day were 1 officer and 9 men killed and 42 
wounded. the night was memorable inasmuch as the battalion, which had 
had no food for fortyeight hours, was allowed to eat its emergency 
rations. 

there was a german attack on the night of the 2zth october, lasting 
for less than an hour, but the advance of the 6th brigade on the 
battalions left, together with the advance of the french still 
farther to the left, threatening passchendaele, kept the enemy 
moderately quiet till the battalion was relieved in the evening of 
the 2zth by the 3rd coldstream, and went into bivouac just west of 
racecourse wood. it was shelled while settling down here and at 
intervals throughout the night. major herbert stepney was slightly 
wounded in the back by a bullet when at supper in a farmhouse 2 
men were killed and 3 wounded. captain a. h. l. mccarthy, r.a.m.c., 
joined for duty, replacing lieutenant shields. 

next morning october 28 the 5th brigade was attacking and the 
battalion was ordered to support. it was heavily shelled again in 
the wood and dug itself in northwest on the racecourse, where it 
stayed all day ready to support the coldstream, and had a quiet 
time. the c.o. lord ardee went to hospital with a bad throat 
lieutenant greer was wounded while serving his machinegun, which had 
been lent to the 3rd coldstream, and a couple of men were wounded. 
drillsergeant a. winspear joined the connaught rangers as 2nd 
lieutenantone of the earliest of the army officers promoted from 
the ranks. 

the enemy at that date were so sure of success that they made no 
attempt to conceal their intentions, and all our spent forces on the 
ypres front were well aware that a serious attack would be opened 
on them on the 29th. rumour said it would be superintended by the 
kaiser himself. but, so far as the battalion was concerned, that day 
was relatively quiet. the 2nd brigade had been ordered to retake 
the trenches lost by the 1st brigade east of gheluvelt, and the 
battalions duty, with the 2nd grenadiers, was to fill up whatever 
gaps might be found in a line which was mainly gaps between the left 
of the 2nd and the right of the 1st brigade near polderhoek. it 
reached the light railway from gheluvelt to polderhoek, discovered 
that the gap there could be filled up by a platoon, communicated with 
the c.o.s of the two brigades concerned, sent back three companies 
to the 4th brigade headquarters, left one at the disposal of the 
1st brigade, and at night withdrew. for the moment, the line could 
be held with the troops on the spot, and it was no policy to use 
a man more than was necessary. the casualties to the men for that 
day were but 4 killed and 6 wounded, though a shell burst on the 
brigade reserve ammunition column, west of racecourse wood, and did 
considerable damage. 

the 30th october opened on the heaviest crisis of the long battle of 
ypres. the battalion, to an accompaniment of jack johnsons, dug 
trenches a quarter of a mile west of racecourse wood in case the 
troops at the farther end of it should be driven back for in those 
years woods were visible and gave good cover. german aeroplanes, 
well aware that they had no antiaircraft guns to fear, swooped low 
over them in the morning, and men could only reply with some pitiful 
riflefire. 

in the afternoon orders came for them and the 2nd grenadiers to stop 
digging and move up to klein zillebeke to support the hardpressed 
seventh division on whose front the enemy had broken through 
again. when they reached what was more or less the line, nos. 1 
and 2 companies were sent forward to support the cavalry in their 
trenches, while nos. 3 and 4 companies dug themselves in behind klein 
zillebeke.3 a gap of about a quarter of a mile was found running 
from the klein zillebekezandvoorde road north to the trenches of the 
2nd gordon highlanders, and patrols reported the enemy in force in a 
strip of wood immediately to the east of it. whether the gap had been 
blasted out by concentrated enemyfire, or whether what the guns had 
left of our cavalry had retired, was never clear. the battalion was 
told off to hold the place and to find out who was on either side of 
them, while the 2nd grenadiers continued the line southward from the 
main road to the canal. beginning at 11 p. m., they dug themselves 
in till morning light. a burning farmhouse blazed steadily all 
night in a hollow by zandvoorde and our patrols on the road could 
see the germans in their spiked helmets silhouetted against the 
glare as they stormed out of the woods and massed behind the fold 
of the ground ready for the mornings attack. two years later, our 
guns would have waited on their telephones till the enemy formation 
was completed and would then have removed those battalions from the 
face of the earth. but we had not those guns. during the night the 
oxfordshire light infantry came up and occupied a farm between the 
battalion and the gordon highlanders and strengthened the situation 
a little. company commanders had already been officially warned that 
the position was serious and that they must hang on at all costs. 
also that the kaiser himself was in front of them. 

on the 31st, after an attack by the french towards hollebeke which 
did not develop, the full storm broke. the battalion, backed by 
two r.f.a. guns, was shelled from seven in the morning till eleven 
oclock at night in such trenches as it had been able to construct 
during the night while machinegun and infantry fire grew steadily 
through the hours. the companies were disposed as follows no. 4 
company immediately to the north of the main wood then no. 3 with 
no. 1 in touch with the oxfordshire light infantry at a farmhouse, 
next to the gordons no. 2 was in reserve at a farm with headquarters. 

on the afternoon of the 31st october, lord ardee arrived from 
hospital, though he was in no state to be out of it, and was greeted 
by the information that the gordons on the left, heavily shelled, had 
been driven out of their trenches. the oxford l.i. and also no. 1 
company of the battalion which was in touch with them had to conform 
to the movement. the section of r.f.a. had to retire also with the 
gordons and, after apologies, duly delivered among bursting german 
shell, for having to look after their guns, they limbered up and 
went off as though it were the military tournament. there was a 
counterattack, and eventually the enemy were driven back and the 
line was reestablished before night, which passed, says the diary 
fairly quietly. the moonlight made movement almost impossible nor 
could the men get any hot tea, their great standby, but rations were 
distributed. the casualties among officers that day were lieutenant 
l. s. coke killed, and buried in the garden of the farm captain lord 
francis scott, lieutenant the earl of kingston, and lieutenant r. 
ferguson wounded. there were many casualties in the front trenches, 
specially among no. 3 company, men being blown to pieces and no 
trace left. the depressing thing, above all, was that we seemed to 
have no guns to reply with. 

bombardment was renewed on the 1st november. the front trenches were 
drenched by fieldguns, at close range, with spurts of heavy stuff 
at intervals the rear by heavy artillery, while machinegun fire 
filled the intervals. one of the trenches of a platoon in no. 3 
company, under lieutenant maitland, was completely blown in, and only 
a few men escaped. the lieutenant remained with the survivors while 
sergeant c. harradine, under heavy fire, took the news to the c.o. 
it was hopeless to send reinforcements the machinegun fire would 
have wiped them out moving and our artillery was not strong enough to 
silence any one sector of the enemys fire. 

in the afternoon the enemy attackedwith riflefire and a 
closerange small piece that broke up our two machinegunsacross 
some dead ground and occupied the wrecked trench, driving back the 
few remains of no. 3 company. the companies on the right and left, 
nos. 4 and 1, after heavy fighting, fell back on no. 2 company, which 
was occupying roughly prepared trenches in the rear. one platoon, 
however, of no. 1 company, under lieutenant n. woodroffe he had 
only left eton a year, did not get the order to retire, and so 
held on in its trench till dark and was certainly instrumental in 
checking the advance of the enemy. the line was near breakingpoint 
by then, but company after company delivered what blow it could, and 
fell back, shelled and machinegunned at every step, to the fringe 
of zillebeke wood. here the officers, every cook, orderly, and man 
who could stand, took rifle and fought for they were all that stood 
there between the enemy and the channel ports. years later, a man 
remembering that fight said twas like a football scrum. every 
one was somebody, yell understand. if he dropped there was no one 
to take his place. great days an we not so frightened as when it 
came to the fightin by machinery on the somme afterwards.4 
the c.o. sent the adjutant to brigade headquarters to ask for help, 
but the whole staff had gone over to the 2nd brigade headquarters, 
whose brigadier had taken over command of the 4th brigade as its own 
brigadier had been wounded. about this time, too, the c.o. of the 
battalion lord ardee was wounded. eventually the 2nd battalion 
grenadiers was sent up with some cavalry of the muchenduring zth 
brigade, and the line of supporttrenches was held. the battalion had 
had nothing to eat for thirtysix hours, so the cavalry kept the line 
for a little till our men got food. 

a french regiment territorials on the right also took over part 
of the trenches of our depleted line. fortyfour men were known to 
have been killed, 205 wounded and 88chiefly from the blownup no. 
3 platoonwere missing. of officers, lieutenant k. r. mathieson had 
been killed he had been last seen shooting a hun who was bayoneting 
our wounded captain mulholland died of his wounds as soon as he 
arrived in hospital at ypres lieut.colonel lord ardee, captain 
vesey, lieutenant gorelangton and lieutenant alexander were wounded, 
and lieutenant g. m. maitland, who had stayed with his handful in no. 
3 companys trench, was missing. yet the time was to come when three 
hundred and fifty casualties would be regarded as no extraordinary 
price to pay for ground won or held. one small draft of 40 men 
arrived from home that night. 

on november 2 the battalion was reduced to three companies since in 
no. 3 company all officers were casualties and only 26 men of it 
answered their names at rollcall. they were heavily shelled all that 
day. they tried to put up a little wire on their front during the 
night they collected what dead they could they received several 
wounded men of the days fight as they crawled into our lines they 
heard one such man calling in the dark, and they heard the enemy turn 
a machinegun on him and silence him. the regular work of sending 
forward and relieving the companies in the front line went on, varied 
by an attack from the enemy, chiefly riflefire, on the night of 
the 3rd november. on that date they received a new machinegun, 
and another draft of sixty men under captain e. c. s. kingharman 
several of whom were killed or wounded that same afternoon. the 
night was filled with false alarms as some of the new drafts began 
to imagine crowds of germans advancing out of the dark. this was a 
popular obsession, but it led to waste of ammunition and waking up 
utterly tired men elsewhere in the line. 

on the 4th november there was an outburst of machinegunning from a 
farmhouse, not 300 yards away. one fieldgun was brought up to deal 
with them, and some of the 2nd life guards stood by to help in event 
of an attack, but the enemy contented themselves with mere punishing 
fire. 

on the evening of november 5 they located our one fieldgun which was 
still trying to cope with the enemys machineguns, shelled it for an 
hour vigorously, blew up the farmhouse that sheltered it, butclean 
missed the gun, though it had been firing at least one round every 
ten minutes. one of our wounded of the 1st november managed to crawl 
into our lines. he had been three days without food or waterthe 
germans, who thought he would die, refusing him both. there was heavy 
shelling and about thirty casualties in the line as far as known. 

on the 6th after an hours preparation with heavy, light, and 
machinegun fire, the enemy attacked the french troops on the 
battalions right, who fell back and left the flank of the battalion 
no. 2 company open. the company in good order and fighting 
fell back by platoons to its support trenches, but this left no. 
1 company practically in the air, and at the end of the day the 
greater part of them were missing. as the germans occupied the 
french trenches in succession, they opened an enfilade fire on the 
irish which did sore execution. once again the adjutant went to the 
brigadier to explain the situation. the household cavalry were sent 
up at the gallop to zillebeke where they dismounted and advanced 
on foot. the 1st life guards on the left were detailed to retake 
the irish guards trenches, while the 2nd life guards attacked 
the position whence the french had been ousted. a hundred irish 
guardsmen, collected on the spot, also took part in the attack, which 
in an hour recovered most of the lost positions. here lieutenant w. 
e. hope was killed, and a little later, lieutenant n. woodroffe fell, 
shot dead in the advance of the household cavalry. two companies, 
had these been available, could have held the supporttrenches 
after the household cavalry had cleared the front, but there were 
no reinforcements and the unceasing pressure on the french drove 
the battalion back on a fresh line a couple of hundred yards behind 
the support trenches which the cavalry held till the remains of the 
battalion had reformed and got some hot tea from the everforward 
cookers. in addition to lieutenants hope and woodroffe killed, 
captain lord john hamilton and lieutenant e. c. s. kingharman, who 
had come out with the draft on the 1st november, were missing that 
day. 

on november z the battalion relieved the cavalry at one in the 
morning, and dug and deepened their trenches on the edge of the 
wood till word came to them to keep up a heavy fire on any enemy 
driven out of the wood, as the 22nd brigade were attacking on their 
right. that brigade now reduced to two composite battalionsthe 
royal welsh fusiliers, with the 2nd queens and the warwicks with 
s. staffordsboth commanded by captains, did all that was humanly 
possible against the pressure, but in the end, as the diary says, 
having failed to get the line required, withdrew under heavy 
shellfire. their attack was no more than one of many desperate 
interludes in the desperate first battle of ypresa winning fight 
against hopeless odds of men and materialbut it diverted attention 
for the moment from the battalions particular section of the line 
and the enemy did not shell our trenches much. early in the day 
major stepney, commanding, went out from the support trenches and 
was not seen again alive. his body was found late in the evening 
between the lines. the command of the battalion now fell to captain 
n. orrewing. 

since october 31 6 officers had been killed, z wounded, and 3 were 
missing. of n.c.o.s and men 64 were dead, 339 wounded, and 194 
missing. the total casualties, all ranks, for one week, were 613. 

the remnant were made into two shrunken companies next day the 8th 
which was a quiet one with intermittent bursts of shelling from 
french .z5s on the right, and german heavies the enemy eighty yards 
distant. captain a. perceval, who had been blown up twice in the past 
week, and lieutenant j. s. n. fitzgerald were sent to hospital. 

on the night of the 9th november the battalion of four platoons, 
three in the firingline and one in reserve, was relieved by the s. 
w. borderers drew supplies and men at brigade headquarters, moved 
back through zillebeke and marched into bivouacs near a farm south of 
the ypreszonnebeke road, where they settled down with some oxford 
l.i. in deep trenches, and dugouts which had been dug by the french. 

they spent the 10th in luxury their cookers were up and the men ate 
their first hot meal for many days. blankets also were issued, and 
a draft of about two hundred men arrived under lieutenant hon. w. 
c. hanburytracy, which brought up the strength of the reorganized 
twocompany battalion to 360 men. major webber, s.r. this is the 
first time that the diary makes mention of the special reserve, 
arrived the day before and as senior officer took over from captain 
orrewing. the other officers who came with him were captain everard 
and lieutenant l. r. hargreaves, both special reserve, with 
lieutenant st. j. r. pigott, and, next day, 2nd lieutenant straker, 
machinegun officer, with two new guns. all these reinforcements 
allowed the battalion to be organized as two companies instead of 
four platoons. 

on the morning of the 11th november, they were moved out by way of 
the bellewaarde lake and under cover of the woods there, in support 
of the oxfordshire l.i. who cleared the wood north of chteau hooge 
and captured some thirty prisoners of the prussian guards. this was 
the first time, to their knowledge, that they had handled that corps. 
though heavily shelled the battalion lost no men and spent the rest 
of the day behind the o.l.i. and the grenadiers, waiting in the 
rain near the headquarters of the first division brigadiergeneral 
fitzclarence, v.c. to which it was for the moment attached. 

it was here that one of our officers found some enemy prisoners 
faithfully shepherded under the lee of a protecting haystack while 
their guard oxford l.i. stood out in the open under casual 
shrapnel. a change was made at once. 

at 9 p. m. the battalion was told it might go back and get tea and 
supplies at some crossroads or other in the darkness behind it. 
the cookers never came up and the supplies were not available till 
past midnight on the 12th. as their orders were to return to 1st 
brigade headquarters at 2 a. m. to take part in an attack on a german 
trench, the men had not much sleep. the trench had been captured by 
the enemy the day before, but they had abandoned it and dug another, 
commanding, in the rear, whence they could deal with any attempt at 
recapture on our part. the composite force of the 2nd grenadiers, 
munster fusiliers, irish guards, and oxfordshire l.i. discovered 
this much, wading through mud in the darkness before dawn, at a cost 
to the battalion of major webber and lieutenant harding and some 
twelve men wounded. they were caught front and flank and scattered 
among the shellholes. general fitzclarence was killed by enemy 
fire out of the dark, and eventually the troops returned to 1st 
brigade headquarters where a company of the grenadiers were told off 
to dig trenches in a gap which had been found in the line, while 
the remainder, the irish guards and the munsters, were sent back to 
the woods near hooge chteau which was full of fragments of broken 
battalions, from scots guards to zouaves. 

the battalion reached its destination at 6 a. m. of the 12th. 
threequarters of an hour later it was ordered up to the woods on 
the gheluvelt road. they occupied dugoutsthe first time the 
diary mentions these as part of the scheme of thingson the north 
side of the road near the end of the wood west of veldhoek sent 
a platoon to reinforce the scots fusiliers who were hardpressed, 
near by and were heavily shelled at intervals all day, besides 
being sniped and machinegunned by the enemy who commanded the main 
road towards hooge. none the less, they were fed that night without 
accident. captains everard and hanburytracy, lieutenant pigott were 
sent to hospital, and 2nd lieutenant antrobus rejoined from hospital. 
this left to the battalioncaptain orrewing, captain the hon. j. 
trefusis, adjutant r. m. c. sandhurst who had joined a day or so 
before, lieutenant l. r. hargreaves, and 2nd lieutenant antrobus, who 
was next day wounded in the arm by a shell. lieutenant walker, acting 
quartermaster, was sick, and captain gough was acting as brigade 
transport officer. at that moment the strength of the battalion is 
reported at about 160 officers and men. a draft of 50 n.c.o.s and 
men arrived on the 13th november. 

on november 14 they were ordered to return to 4th brigade 
headquarters and take over trenches near klein zillebeke from the 
s. w. borderers who had relieved them there on the 9th. the day 
passed much as usual, it was observed, but the shelling was 
fairly heavy and the enemy gained some ground. lieutenant and 
quartermaster hickie returned from a sick leave of two months. the 
sussex battalion relieved the battalion in their dugouts on the edge 
of the veldhoek woods at 11 p. m. the battalion then moved off and 
by halfpast three on the morning of the 15th had relieved the south 
wales borderers in their old trenches. here they received word of the 
death of their colonel, fieldmarshal lord roberts, from pneumonia 
while on a visit to the indian troops at the front. c.s.m. rogers 
and pte. murphy were selected as representatives of the battalion 
to attend the funeral service at st. omer. the battalion spent the 
day under constant shellfire in improving trenches, but there was 
some difficulty as snipers were busy, as they had been all day. one 
officer wrote our men are very tired and the rifles are in an awful 
state. it rains continuously, and it is very hard to get any sort of 
rifleoil. 

the 16th november, a day of snow and heavy firing, ending in an 
attack which was suppressed by rapid fire, was grimly enlivened by 
the appearance of one german deserter with two fingers shot off who 
announced that he had had enough of fighting. 

on the 1zth november, brigade headquarters were blown in by 
shellfire, both of the irish guards orderlies on duty were injured, 
and both of the battalions two new machineguns were knocked to 
pieces. there was five hours heavy shelling from z a. m. till noon 
when the enemy came out of their trenches to attack in force, and 
were dealt with for an hour by the battalion, the grenadiers on its 
left and the cavalry on its right. it was estimated thatthanks to 
efficient fire control and good disciplinetwelve hundred killed and 
wounded were accounted for in front of our trenches. our only man 
killed in this attack was c.s.m. munns who had been just recommended 
for his commission. he was a born leader of men, always cheerful, and 
with what seemed like a genuine love for fighting. a second attack, 
not pressed home, followed at three oclock another outbreak of 
smallarm fire at halfpast nine and yet another towards midnight, 
and a heavy shelling of the french on our right. then all was 
quiet, says the easily satisfied record. 

they endured one day longer, with nothing worse than a certain 
amount of heavy shelling but not so much as usual, and on the 18th 
their battered remnants came out. they were relieved by a company of 
the 3rd coldstream captain h. dawson and marched off to billets 
at potijze on the ypreszonnebeke road, where the men got plenty of 
food. hard frost had followed the soaking wet and downpour of the 
previous days snow succeeded, but there were hot meals and the hope 
of rest and refit at meteren behind bailleul, fifteen miles from 
potijze. 

they reached that haven on the 21st novembereight officers and 390 
men in alldesperately tired in a cold that froze the water in the 
mens bottles. not a man fell out. captain lord desmond fitzgerald, 
recovered from his wound, arrived on the same day and took over the 
adjutancy. 

the battalion had been practically wiped out and reconstructed in 
a month. they had been cramped in wet mud till they had almost 
forgotten the use of their legs their rifles, clothing, equipment, 
everything except their morale and the undefeated humour with which 
they had borne their burden, needed renewal or repair. they rested 
and began to clean themselves of their dirt and vermin while the 
c.o. and company officers went round billets and companiesto see 
that the men had all they neededas is the custom of our army. it 
was a comprehensive refit, including everything from trousers to 
groundsheets, as well as mufflers and mittens sent by h.i.h. the 
grand duke michael of russia. steady platoon and company drill, which 
is restorative to men after long standing in dirt, or fighting in the 
dark, marked the unbelievably still days. 

on the 23rd november the reverend father gwynne, the beloved r.c. 
chaplain, arrived to take up his duties and on the 24th they were 
inspected by the commanderinchief, sir john french. 

on the 28th a draft of 288 n.c.o.s and men reached them, under 
command of captain p. l. reid with the following officers lieutenant 
g. gough 2nd lieutenants h. s. keating, h. marioncrawford, hon. 
h. a. v. harmsworth, a. c. innes, and l. c. lee. with this draft 
the strength of the battalion stood at z00 men and 15 officers. of 
the latter the diary notes that nine are in the special reserve, 
seven of them having done no sort of soldiering before the war. 
mercifully, men lived but one day at a time, or the diarist 
might have drawn conclusions, which would have fallen far short 
of what the future was to bring, from the fact that as many as 
twelve machinegunners were kept at the base by the order of the 
authorities. there was need to train machinegunners, and even 
greater need for the guns themselves. but the battalion was not 
occupied with the larger questions of the war. they had borne their 
part against all odds of numbers and equipment in barring the german 
road to the sea in the first monthlong battle of ypres. they knew 
very little of what they had done. not one of their number could have 
given any consecutive account of what had happened, nor, in that 
generalpost of daily and nightly confusion whither they had gone. 
all they were sure of was that such as lived were not dead the lord 
only knows why and that the enemy had not broken through. they had 
no knowledge what labours still lay before them. 

on the 3rd december, after an issue of new equipment and a visit 
from sir douglas haig, commanding the first army corps, they lined 
the road from meteren towards bailleul for the visit of the king who 
walked down the lines of the 4th guards brigade and, after shaking 
hands with the four commanding officers of the brigade, said i am 
very proud of my guards and am full of admiration for their bravery, 
endurance, and fine spirit. i wish i could have addressed them all, 
but that is impossible, so you must tell them what i say to you. you 
are fighting a brave and determined enemy, but if you go on as you 
have been doing and show the same fine spirit, there can be only one 
end, please god, and that is victory. i wish you all good luck. 

d.s.o.s had been awarded to captain orrewing and captain lord 
francis scott and the distinguished conduct medal to company 
sergeantmajor munns, who, it will be remembered, was killed in 
action just after he was recommended for a commission to sergeant 
mgoldrick, brigade orderly, who was one of the orderlies injured 
when the brigade headquarters were blown up on the 1zth november 
corporal riordan wounded, private russell brigade orderly, 
and private glynn since wounded and missing. the king decorated 
sergeant mgoldrick with the d.c.m. that afternoon. the others named 
were, from various causes, absent. it was the first of many such 
occasions where those honoured could not be present to receive their 
valours reward. 

the diary notes the issue of cardigan waistcoats and goatskin coats 
for each man, as well as of a new american pattern boot, with a hard 
toe which, it conservatively fears, may not stand the wear of the 
old ammunitionboot. routemarches increased in length, and the 
men marched as well as they ate. indeed, they volunteered to the 
brigadier, who came round once to see the dinners, that they had 
never been so well fed. it kept them healthy, though there were the 
usual criticisms from officers, n.c.o.s. and surviving veterans of 
the regular army, on the quality of the new drafts, some of whom, it 
seems, suffered from bad teeth and had to be sent away for renewals 
and refits. as a muchtried sergeant remarked a man with a sore 
tooth is a nuisance an a danger to the whole british army. 

on the 9th december sir douglas haig came over to present the 
mdaille militaire, on behalf of the french government, to certain 
officers, n.c.o.s, and men of the guards brigade. drillsergeant 
rodgers of the battalion was among the recipients. captain orrewing 
was ordered to rejoin the 1st battalion of the scots guards his own 
battalion, to the regret of the battalion whose lot he had shared 
since septemberthe most capable of officers as the most popular of 
comrades. 

a party from the brigade was sent to headquarters of the 11th 
engineering company to be taught how to throw bombs made out of 
jampots, which apparently are used against the enemy at close 
quarters in the present trenchwarfare. there were at least 
halfadozen more or less dangerous varieties of these handmade 
bombs in use, before standard patterns were evolved and bombing took 
its place as a regular aid to warfare. the jampot bomb died early 
but not before it had caused a sufficiency of trouble to its users. 
the others will be mentioned in due course. 

aeroplane duty was another invention of those early days. a company 
was told off daily to look out for aeroplanes and, if possible, to 
bring them downpresumably by riflefire. the war was still very 
young. 

f.m. earl kitcheners appointment to colonel of the battalion in 
succession to f.m. earl roberts was marked on the 12th in the 
following telegram from earl kitchener 

  his majesty the king, having been graciously pleased to appoint 
  me to be colonel of the irish guards, i desire to take the first 
  opportunity of expressing to you and through you to all ranks how 
  proud i am to be associated with so gallant a regiment. my warmest 
  greetings and best wishes to you all 

the c.o. replied 

  all ranks, 1st battalion irish guards, greatly appreciate the 
  honour conferred on them by his majesty the king, and are proud to 
  have such a distinguished soldier as colonel of the regiment. 

on the 13th december a further draft of 100 men and three officers 
arrived under captain mylne the other officers being lieutenant 
antrobus who was wounded exactly a month before, and lieutenant 
hubbard. this brought the battalions strength to 800 with the 
following officers major the hon. j. trefusis, c.o. captain lord 
desmond fitzgerald, adjutant lieutenant c. a. s. walker, transport 
officer 2nd lieutenant l. straker, machinegun officer captain 
a. h. l. mccarthy, medical officer captain rev. father gwynne, 
chaplain lieutenant h. hickie, quartermaster. no. 1 company, captain 
e. j. gough, lieutenant l. hargreaves, 2nd lieutenant a. c. innes. 
no. 2 company, captain e. mylne, 2nd lieutenant h. s. keating, 2nd 
lieutenant f. h. witts. no. 3 company, captain p. l. reid, 2nd 
lieutenant p. h. antrobus, 2nd lieutenant hon. h. v. harmsworth, 2nd 
lieutenant h. marioncrawford. no. 4 company, lieutenant g. gough, 
lieutenant g. hubbard, 2nd lieutenant lee. 

lieutenant c. a. s. walker had to go to hospital with bronchitis and 
lieutenant antrobus took over from him. 

major arbuthnot scots guards arrived on the 14th december with 
queen alexandras presents to the battalion which were duly issued to 
selected officers, n.c.o.s, and men, but at the time, the battalion 
was under two hours notice to move either to support an attack then 
being delivered by the third division upon the wood at wytschaete, 
or for any other purpose. the attack was not a success except in 
so far as it pinned the enemy forces to one place, but the battalion 
was not called upon to help. it lived under short notice for a week 
which naturally interfered with extended routemarches or training. 
companies were sent out one by one to dig in the waterlogged soil 
and to extemporise means of keeping their feet out of the water by 
blocks of wood made in the form of a platform at the bottom of the 
trenches. thus laboriously is described the genesis of what was 
later to grow into thousands of miles of duckboard, plain or wired. 

meantime, between the 20th and 22nd of december the fierce and 
unsatisfactory battle of cuinchy, the burden of which fell heavily 
on our devoted indian troops, had been fought out on a front of 
halfadozen miles from south of the bthune canal to festubert. 
nothing had been gained except the allimportant issuethat the 
enemy did not break through. there was a long casualtylist as 
casualties were then counted, and the indian brigades were withdrawn 
from their wrecked and sodden trenches for a little rest. the guards 
brigade was ordered to relieve them, and on the 22nd marched out 
from meteren. the herts territorial battalion to be honourably and 
affectionately known later as the herts guards led that first 
march, followed by the 2nd coldstream, 1st battalion irish guards, 
the 3rd coldstream, and the 2nd grenadiers. they billeted at bthune 
where, on the 23rd december, the 2nd coldstream in support, they 
took over their share of the indian trenches near le touret between 
essars and richebourg lavou, and on christmas eve after tea and the 
distribution of the christmas puddings from england, the battalion, 
with the hertfordshires relieved the 4th dogras, 6th jats, and 9th 
gurkhas. it is recorded that the gurkha, being a somewhat shorter man 
than the average guardsman, the long irish had to dig their trenches 
about two feet deeper, and they wondered loudly what sort of persons 
these little dark fellas could be. 

the christmas truce of 1914 reached the battalion in severely 
modified form. they lay among a network of trenches, already many 
times fought over, with communications that led directly into the 
enemys lines a couple of hundred yards away. so they spent christmas 
day, under occasional bombardment of heavy artillery, in exploring 
and establishing themselves as well as they might among these wet and 
dreary works. in this duty lieutenant g. p. gough and lieutenant f. 
h. witts and six men were wounded. 

earl kitchener, their colonel, sent them christmas wishes and the 
kings and queens christmas cards were distributed. their comfort 
was that christmas night was frosty so that the men kept dry at least. 

boxing day was quiet, too, and only four men were wounded as they 
dug in the hard ground to improve their communications with the 
2nd coldstream on their left. then the frost broke in rain, the 
clay stuck to the spade, the trenches began to fill and a deserter 
brought news of an impending attack which turned out to be nothing 
more serious than a bombing affair which was duly attended to. some 
of our own shells bursting short killed one man and wounded six. 
princess marys gifts of pipes, tobacco, and christmas cards were 
distributed to the men and duly appreciated. 

the impossibility of keeping anything free from mud forced them to 
reduce their firingline to the least possible numbers, while those 
in support, or billets, made shift to clean rifles and accoutrements. 
the days went forward in rain and wet, with digging where water 
allowed, and a regular daily toll of a few men killed and wounded. 

on the 30th december captain eric gough was killed by a stray bullet 
while commanding his company no. 1 and was buried next day in a 
cemetery a few miles along the bthunerichebourg road. he had been 
transport officer since the battalion left london in august, but 
had commanded a company since the 21st november, and was an immense 
loss to the battalion to which he was devoted. lieutenant sir g. 
burke and 2nd lieutenant j. m. stewart came from england on the same 
day and were posted to no. 1 company now commanded by lieutenant l. 
hargreaves. 

the diary ends the year with a recapitulation more impressive in its 
restraint than any multitude of words 

  the country round this part is very lowlying, intersected with 
  ditches with pollarded willows growing on their banks. no sooner 
  is a trench dug than it fills with water.... the soil is clay, and 
  so keeps the water from draining away even if that were possible. 
  in order to keep the men at all dry, they have to stand on planks 
  rested on logs in the trenches, and in the less wet places bundles 
  of straw and short fascines are put down. pumping has been tried, 
  but not with much success. the weather continues wet, and there 
  does not seem to be any likelihood of a change. consequently, we 
  may expect some fresh discomforts daily. 




1915 

la basse to laventie 


they were not disappointed. new years day was marked by the flooding 
out of a section of forward trenches, and by experiments with a 
trenchmortar, from which 2nd lieutenant keating and some garrison 
gunners threw three bombs at an enemy diggingparty a couple of 
hundred yards away. this is the first reference to our use of 
trenchmortars in the young campaign. the enemy retaliated next day 
by bombing from their real trenchmortars, at a distance of seven 
hundred yards, the small farmhouse where battalion headquarters 
lay. the bombs could be seen coming at a very steep angle, but the 
house was only once hit. daylight showed the work of the irish 
trenchmortar to have been so goodit had blown a gap in the german 
trenchthat they continued it and inflicted and observed much damage. 

they were relieved on the 3rd january by the kings royal rifles 
and got to billets near vieille chapelle late that night. a london 
gazette announced that the distinguished conduct medal had been 
awarded no. 2535 sergeant c. harradine no. 1664 corporal c. moran 
no. 4015 private w. moore since killed in action no. 2853 
lancecorporal w. delaney. also the new decoration called the 
military cross had been awarded to lieutenant the hon. h. w. gough. 

the battalion, as a whole, had its reward for the past ten days 
when the brigadier expressed his approval of the work of the guards 
brigade and especially that of the irish guards. 

cleaning and refit, classes in bombthrowing both by hand and from 
rifles under the engineers and an elementary machinegun class 
under 2nd lieutenant straker, filled in the week but the most 
appreciated boon at vieille chapelle was some huge tubs in which the 
men could be boiled clean. father gwynne held service in the roofless 
shellwrecked church, long since wiped out. 

they took over trenches from the worcesters on the 8th with a cold 
knowledge of what awaited them for the diary notes, the day before 
another wet day, which will probably completely fill trenches on 
the left of the new line with water. but it did not fill them more 
than two feet deep, though the whole line was afloat, and in the 
communicationtrenches seven men got stuck in the mud one of them 
was not extricated for six hours. the relief took six and a half 
hours in pouring rain, with one man killed and two wounded. the 
front line of the guards brigade was held by the 3rd coldstream on 
the right, the 2nd coldstream in support one company of the 2nd 
grenadiers in the centre, and the rest of the battalion in support 
the irish guards on the left, the herts territorials in support. the 
grenadiers relieved their front company every twentyfour hours, 
the others every fortyeight. this meant that battalion c.o.s had 
to spend most of their time in the front line studying what was, in 
effect, the navigation of canals. 

on the 9th january, for example, the water averaged three feet in 
the trenches and, as that average rose, it was decided to leave 
a few strong posts in comparatively dry positions and withdraw 
the others along the rue du bois into the destroyed village of 
richebourg lavou. luckily, the enemy, not two hundred yards away, 
had his own troubles to attend to and, despite his lavish flares and 
musketryfire, our men were extricated, bodily in some instances, 
with but 3 killed and 2 wounded. 

on the 10th january the herts regiment relieved them, and the whole 
battalion billeted at richebourg st. vaast. casualties from smallarm 
fire had been increasing owing to the sodden state of the parapets 
but the battalion retaliated a little from one telescopicsighted 
rifle sent up by lieutenant the earl of kingston, with which 
drillsergeant bracken certainly accounted for 3 killed and 4 
wounded of the enemy. the diary, mercifully blind to the dreadful 
years to come, thinks, there should be many of these rifles used as 
long as the army is sitting in trenches. many of them were so used 
this, the father of them all, now hangs in the regimental mess. 

then trenchfeet and rheumatism developed, and in fortyeight hours 
fifty men had to be sent to hospital for one form or other of these 
complaints. 

a draft of a hundred fresh men arrived between the 11th and 12th of 
january with six officers captain p. s. longinnes, 2nd lieutenants 
f. f. graham, j. r. ralli, r. b. h. kemp, d. w. gunston derek and 
j. t. robyns. economy in officers and men was not yet possible for 
when an officer was not in the front line he had more than all he 
could do to look after what comforts were obtainable for the men. 
yet concessions were made to human weakness for when the battalion 
returned to its trenches on the 12th an order was received and, to 
some extent, obeyed that men were not to stand in the water for 
more than twelve hours at a time. this called for continuous 
reliefs of the platoons, as it took a man most of his rest in 
billets to scrape himself moderately clean. to save the labour of 
portage through the mud, each man was given two days supplies 
when he went into the trenches, plus some dry tea and a couple of 
tins of maconochie to heat up over the braziers. the idea worked 
satisfactorily for the days of the merciless airpatrols had yet 
to come and the braziers flared naked to heaven while the irish 
drummed up, which is to say, stewed their tea or rations on them. 

the hopeless work of improving positions in soil no stiffer than 
porridge was resumed, and the telescopicsighted rifle, in the 
hands of sergeantmajor kirk and drillsergeant bracken, who were 
later congratulated by the g.o.c. second division, continued its 
discreet and guarded labours among the enemy. only 1 man was killed 
and 1 wounded on the 13th january, and the night of that easy day 
passed off quietly, the enemy occupying himself chiefly with singing 
songs or playing on mouthorgans. here and elsewhere he was given 
to spasms of music for no ascertainable reason, which the irish, who 
do not naturally burst into song, rather resented. between morceaux 
he sent up many coloured flares, while our workingparties silently 
completed and christened by the name of gibraltar a post to command 
a flooded gap in the oozy line. 

they were relieved on the 15th january by the highland light infantry 
of the 3rd brigade lahore division which was taking over the line 
held by the 4th guards brigade. the battalion went back to brigade 
reserve billets at locon.5 

their last week in the trenches had cost them 82 casualties including 
sick, but it is worth noting that, at this time, captain mccarthy, 
the medical officer, by issuing mustard mixed with lard for the 
men to rub on their feet, had in three days got the better of the 
epidemic of trench or, as they were then called, swollen feet. 

it was while in reserve that 2nd lieut. keating, bombing instructor 
and in charge of the trenchmortars, lost his life and 13 men were 
wounded owing to the premature explosion of an oldtype fused bomb 
with which he was instructing a class. second lieutenant keating was 
buried next day in the cemetery near le touret, where many guardsmen 
were already laid, and his epitaph may worthily stand as it was 
writtena very capable officer, always ready to undertake any task 
however difficult or dangerous. 

after a few days the battalion went into corps reserve and spent a 
week in being smartened up behind the line with steady drill, 
rifle exercises, routemarching and kit inspection, on rainy days, 
lest life in the caked filth of the trenches should lead any one 
to forget the standard of the brigade of guards which under no 
circumstance allows any excuse. 

their work was interrupted by another kaiserbattle, obediently 
planned to celebrate the all highests birthday. it began on the 
25th january with a demonstration along the whole flat front from 
festubert to vermelles. bthune was also shelled from an armoured 
train run out of la basse, and a heavy attack was launched by 
prussian infantry on a salient of our line, held by the 1st infantry 
brigade, where it joined the french line among the tangle of railway 
tracks and brickfields near cuinchy. owing to the mud, the salient 
was lightly manned by half a battalion of the scots guards and half 
a battalion of the coldstream. their trenches were wiped out by the 
artillery attack and their line fell back, perhaps half a mile, to 
a partially prepared position among the brickfields and railway 
lines between the airela basse canal and the la bassebthune 
road. here fighting continued with reinforcements and counterattacks 
kneedeep in mud till the enemy were checked and a none too stable 
defence made good between a mess of german communicationtrenches and 
a keep or redoubt held by the british among the huge brickstacks 
by the railway. so far as the battalion was concerned, this phase 
of the affair seems to have led to no more than two or three days 
standingto in readiness to support with the rest of the brigade, and 
taking what odd shells fell to their share. 

no institutions are more selfcentred than a battalion in the face 
of war. steady drill, and company kit inspections were carried on 
in the lulls of the waiting, and their main preoccupation was how 
much water might be expected in the new trenches when their turn 
came to occupy them. the germans were devoting some of their heavy 
artillery to shelling the lock of the airela basse canal at pont 
fixe, between givenchy and cuinchy, in the hope of bursting it and 
flooding the country. they spent more than a hundred eightinch 
howitzer shells on that endeavour in one day, and laterlong after 
the lock had been thoroughly protected with sandbagsused to give 
it stated doses of shell at regular intervals. similarly, they would 
bombard one special spot on the line near bthune because once in 14 
an armoured train of ours had fired thence at them. 

the battalion had just been reinforced by a draft of 10z men and 
4 officerscaptain eric greer, lieutenant blackerdouglass, 2nd 
lieutenant r. g. c. yerburgh, and 2nd lieutenant s. g. tallents. 
they were under orders to move up towards the fighting among the 
brickfields which had opened on the 25th, and had not ceased since. 
unofficial reports described the trenches they were to take over 
as not very wet but otherwise damnable, and on the 30th january 
the battalion definitely moved from locon, with the 2nd coldstream, 
via bthune to cuinchy. here the coldstream took over from the 
2nd brigade the whole line of a thousand yards of trench occupied 
by them the irish furnishing supports. the rest of the brigade, 
that is to say, the herts territorials, the grenadiers, and the 3rd 
coldstream were at annequin, beuvry, and bthune. 

the companies were disposed between the la bassebthune road 
and the railway, beside the airela basse canal. the centre of 
their line consisted of a collection of huge dull plumcoloured 
brickstacks, mottled with black, which might have been originally 
thirty feet high. five of these were held by our people and the 
others by the enemythe whole connected and interlocked by saps and 
communicationtrenches new and old, without key or finality. neither 
side could live in comfort at such close quarters until they had 
strengthened their lines either by local attacks, bombing raids or 
systematised artillery work. the whole position, an officer remarks 
professionally, is most interesting and requires careful handling 
and a considerable amount of ingenuity. 

illustration 

  first battalion 
  actions  billets. 

  emery walker ltd. del. et sc. 

printed in great britain by emery walker ltd., london 

except for railway embankments and culverts, the country about was so 
flat that a bullet once started had no reason to stop. the men were 
billeted in solidbuilt flemish houses with bulletproof partitions, 
and therefore, unless noticeably shelled, were inclined to walk about 
in front of the houses in the daylight, till they were sternly set 
to work to clean their billets of months of accumulations of refuse 
and to bury neglected carcases. war and all connected with it was 
infinitely stale already, but houses and the ruins of them had not 
yet been wholly wiped out in that sector. 

they were installed by the last day of the month with no greater 
inconvenience than drifts of stray bullets over the support trenches, 
and unsystematic shelling of battalion headquarters two or three 
hundred yards in the rear, and some desultory bombing in the 
complicated front line. 

early in the morning of the 1st february a post held by the 
coldstream in a hollow near the embankment, just west of the railway 
trianglea spot unholy beyond most, even in this sectorwas bombed 
and rushed by the enemy through an old communicationtrench. no. 4 
company irish guards was ordered to help the coldstreams attack. the 
men were led by lieutenant blackerdouglass who had but rejoined on 
the 25th january. he was knocked over by a bomb within a few yards of 
the german barricade to the trench, picked himself up and went on, 
only to be shot through the head a moment later. lieutenant lee of 
the same company was shot through the heart the company commander, 
captain longinnes, and 2nd lieutenant blom were wounded, and the 
command devolved on c.q.m.s. carton, who, in spite of a verbal order 
to retire which he did not believe, held on till the morning in the 
trench under such cover of shellholes and hasty barricades as could 
be found or put up. the germans were too well posted to be moved 
by bomb or rifle, so, when daylight showed the situation, our big 
guns were called upon to shell for ten minutes, with shrapnel, the 
hollow where they lay. the spectacle was sickening, but the results 
were satisfactory. then a second attack of some fifty coldstream and 
thirty irish guards of no. 1 company under lieutenants graham and 
innes went forward, hung for a moment on the fringe of their own 
shrapnelfor barrages were new thingsand swept up the trench. it 
was here that lancecorporal oleary, lieutenant inness orderly, 
won his v.c. he rushed up along the railway embankment above the 
trenches, shot down 5 germans behind their first barricade in 
the trench, then 3 more trying to work a machinegun at the next 
barricade fifty yards farther along the trench, and took a couple 
of prisoners. eyewitnesses report that he did his work quite 
leisurely and wandered out into the open, visible for any distance 
around, intent upon killing another german to whom he had taken a 
dislike. meantime, graham, badly wounded in the head, and innes, 
together with some coldstream, had worked their way into the post and 
found it deserted. our guns and our attack had accounted for about 
30 dead, but had left 32 wounded and unwounded prisoners, all of 
whom, with one exception, wept aloud. the hollow was full of mixed 
deadcoldstream, irish, and german. 

the men who remained of no. 4 company did not settle down to 
the work of consolidating their position till they had found 
blackerdouglasss body. at least a couple of his company had been 
wounded in the first attack while trying to bring it away. lees body 
was recovered not far off. 

a quarter of an hour after the post had fallen, the engineers were 
up with unlimited sandbags and helped the men who worked as they 
ate among the piled horrors around them, while everything was made 
ready for the expected german counterattack. it did not come. not 
only had the post been abandoned, but also a couple of trenches 
running out of it to the southward. these were duly barricaded in 
case the enemy were minded to work back along them at dusk. but for 
the rest of the day they preferred to shell killing 2 and wounding 
5 men of the two companies which were relieved by a company of the 
3rd coldstream and one of the 3rd grenadiers. our men returned to 
billets very tired and hungry, but very pleased with themselves. 
that days work had cost us 2 officers and 8 men killed 3 officers 
and 24 men wounded, and 2 men missing. in return, two machineguns, 
8 whole and 24 wounded prisoners had been taken, the post recovered 
and, perhaps, sixty yards of additional trench with it. such was the 
price paid in those years for maintaining even a foothold against the 
massed pressure of the enemy. it is distinctly noted in the diary 
that two complete machineguns were added to the defence of the 
post after it had been recaptured. machineguns were then valuable 
articles of barter, for when the french who were their neighbours 
wished to borrow one such article for moral and material support, 
a brigadiergenerals permission had to be obtained. 

this experience had shown it was better for each battalion in the 
line to provide its own supports, and they reorganized on the 2nd 
february on this basis the 2nd and 3rd coldstream guards taking over 
the left half of the line up to within fifty yards of the keep, while 
for their right, to the main la basse road, the 2nd grenadiers and 
the irish guards were responsibleeach with two companies in the 
fire trench and two in support, and all on fortyeight hours relief. 

the enemy continued to shell the captured position, killing 2 and 
wounding 9 men that day, but no counterattack developed and a few 
days later it was decided to straighten out the front then held 
by the 4th guards brigade. the fighting on the 25th had left it 
running irregularly through the big brickyard, before mentioned. of 
the dozen or more solid stacks of brick, four or five connected by 
a parapet of loose bricks and known as the keep, were in our hands. 
the other eight, irregularly spaced, made a most awkward wedge into 
our line. they were backed by a labyrinth of german trenchwork, and, 
being shellproof, supports could be massed behind them in perfect 
safety. the nearest were within bombing distance of the keep, and, in 
those days, the germans had more and better bombs than we. on every 
account, then, the wedge had to be cleared, the stacks and their 
connecting trenches overrun and the line advanced a hundred and fifty 
yards or so to get a better field of fire. as a preliminary, a small 
but necessary piece of german trench on the flanks of the keep was 
captured by the irish on the 5th february with a loss of but 2 killed 
and none wounded. 

at 2 p. m. on the 6th of february the stacks were heavily bombarded 
for a quarter of an houra large allowance. even mother, a 
neighbouring 9.2, probably of naval extraction, took part in it, 
and some french artillery ringed the approaches on the german side 
with screens of black melenite fumes, while no. 2 company from 
the front trenches swept the german parapet facing them with five 
minutes of that old rapid fire which the germans in the salient 
and elsewhere had so often mistaken for machinegun work. then two 
assaulting parties of thirty men each from nos. 3 and 1 companies, 
under 2nd lieutenant t. musgrave and j. ralli, opened the attack on 
five of the eight stacks. the other three were fairly dealt with on 
the same lines by the 3rd coldstream. as there was no wire left on 
the trench before our stacks, our party got there almost at once, 
but musgrave, ahead of his men, was shot by a group of five germans 
who showed fight behind a few fatal unbroken strands in the rear. 
they were all killed a moment later when the men came up. then the 
supporting parties under lieutenant innes were slipped, together 
with the engineers under major fowkes, r.e., and the combined attack 
swept on through the brickstacks, in and out of the trenches and 
around and behind them, where the germans were shot and bayoneted as 
found, tillfighting, digging, cursing and sandbaggingour men had 
hacked their way some seventy yards beyond their objective and dug 
in under a shelf of raw ground about three feet high, probably the 
lip of an old claypit. our guns had lifted and were choking off all 
attempts at possible counterattacks, but the german supports seem 
to have evaporated in the direction of la basse. there was a ridge 
in front of the captured position whence a few bullets were still 
dropping, but the back of the defence had been broken and, as firing 
diminished, first one and then two out of every three men were set 
digging in and filling sandbags. the fortunes of the little campaign 
had gone smoothly, and when it was necessary, in the rough and tumble 
of the trenchwork, to bring up reinforcements or more shovels and 
ammunition for the diggingparties, the indefatigable and brotherly 
herts territorials were drawn upon. the coldstream had carried their 
share of the front and lay in line on our left, and at dusk, while 
the engineers were putting up more wire, under riflefire at 150 
yards range, the position was secure. 

our casualties, thanks to the bombardment and the swiftness of the 
attack, were only 1 officer and 6 men killed and 25 wounded. father 
gwynne, the chaplain, was severely wounded by a piece of shrapnel 
while watching the attack from an observationpost, which, as the 
father understood it, meant as far forward as possible, in order 
that he might be ready to give comfort to the dying. the coldstream 
gathered in twentyeight prisoners, the irish none, but among their 
spoils is entered one iron cross won rather picturesquely. at the 
opening of the rush the germans made a closerange bombingraid on 
one of the corners of the keep and at last pitched a bomb on to the 
top of a sandbag redoubt. this so annoyed one of our bombthrowers, 
a giant of the name of hennigan, of no. 1 company, that he picked up 
a trenchmortar bomb no trinket which lay convenient, cut down the 
fuse for short range and threw it at a spot where he had caught a 
glimpse of a german officer. the bomb burst almost before it reached 
the ground, and must have made a direct hit for nothing upon the 
officer was recognisable later save the iron cross, which in due time 
went to the regimental orderly room. hennigan was awarded the d.c.m. 
for his bomb also blew in and blocked up the communicationtrench 
through which the bombers camea matter which he regarded as a 
sideissue compared to his splendid bowlin. 

the companies were relieved in the evening by a company of 
grenadiers, and as they wandered back through the newtaken trenches 
in the winter dusk, lost their way among all manner of horrors. 
one officer wrote i fell over and became involved in a kind of 
wrestlingmatch with a shapeless thing that turned out to be a dead 
man without a head ... and so back to beuvry, very tired and sad for 
the death of tommy musgrave. 

there were other casualties that moved laughter under the ribs of 
death. a man reported after the action that his teeth were all broke 
on him. his company officer naturally expressed sympathy but some 
surprise at not seeing a bullethole through both cheeks. i took 
them out and put them in my pocket for the charge, sorr, and they 
all broke on me, was the reply. well, go to the doctor and see if 
he can get you a new set. ive been to him, sorr, and its little 
sympathy i got. he just gave me a pill and chased me away, sorr. 

a weird attempt was made at daybreak on the zth february by a forlorn 
hope of some fifty germans to charge the newly installed line at a 
point where the coldstream and 2nd grenadiers joined. they dashed 
out across the ground from behind a stack, the officer waving his 
sword, and were all killed or wounded on or close up to our wire. men 
said there seemed no meaning or reason in the affair, unless it was 
a suicideparty of germans who had run from the attack of the day 
before and had been ordered thus to die. one of their wounded lay out 
all day, and when the irish were taking over the relief on the 8th 
some germans shouted loudly from their trenches and one stood up 
and pointed to the wounded man. said the grenadiers who were being 
relieved come and get him a couple of german stretcherbearers 
came out and bore their comrade away, not thirty yards from our 
trench, while our men held their fire. 

in the same relief it fell to the irish to examine the body of a 
single german who had crept up and of a sudden peered into our 
frontline trench, where a grenadier promptly shot him. he dropped on 
the edge of the parapet and lay like a man praying. since he had 
no rifle, it was assumed he was a bomber but after dark they found 
he was wholly unarmed. at almost the same hour of the previous night 
another german came to precisely the same end in the same posture 
on the right flank of the line. whether these two were deserters or 
scouts who would pretend to be deserters, if captured, was never 
settled. the trenches were full of such mysteries. strange trades, 
too, were driven there. a man, now gone to valhalla, for he was 
utterly brave, did not approve of letting dead germans lie unvisited 
before the lines. he would mark the body down in the course of his 
days work, thrust a stick in the parados to give him his direction, 
and at night, or preferably when the morning fog lay heavy on the 
landscape, would slip across to his quarry and return with his 
pockets filled with loot. many officers had seen cs stick at 
the back of the trench. some living may like to learn now why it was 
there.6 

a draft of one hundred men, making good the weeks losses, came in 
on the 8th february under captain g. e. young, lieutenants t. allen 
and c. pease, and 2nd lieutenant v. w. d. fox. among them were many 
wounded who had returned. they fell to at once on the strengthening 
and cleaning up of the new line which lay less than a hundred yards 
from the enemy. it supported the french line where that joined on 
to ours, and the officers would visit together through a tunnel 
under the roadway. of this forlorn part of the world there is a tale 
that stands best as it was written by one of the officers of the 
battalion and while we were barricading with sandbags where the 
old trench joined the road, a dead coldstream lying against a tree 
watched us with dull unobservant eyes.... while we were trudging 
along the pav, mortally weary after relief, said the sergeant 
to me did you hear what happened last night? you saw that dead 
man by the tree, sir? well, the coveringparty they lay all round 
him. one of them tapped him on the shoulder an asked him if he were 
asleep. and presently, the c.s.m. that came down with the relief, he 
whispered to the corporal, how many men have ye got out, corporal? 
five, sir, says the corporal. i can see six meself, says the 
c.s.m. five belong to me, says the corporal. count em, lad, 
says the c.s.m. five came out with me, says the corporal, and the 
sixth, faith, tis cold he is with watching us every night this six 
weeks. 

for a while the days and nights were peaceful, as peace was counted 
round the brickstacks. the unspeakably foul german trenches were 
supplemented with new ones, communicationtrenches multiplied and 
marked with proper signboards, and such historic mainarteries 
as the old kent road trench paved with bricks from the stacks. 
by night the front line sat and shivered round braziers in the 
freezing dark while bits of newmade trench fell around them, and 
listeningposts at the head of old saps and barricaded alleys 
reported imaginary nightattacks. when they worked on a captured 
trench they were like as not to find it bottomed, or worse still, 
revetted, with an enemy corpse, which the sliding mud would deliver 
hideously into the arms of the party. on such occasions the sensitive 
would be sick, while the more hardened warmed and ate their food 
unperturbed amid all the offal. but there were compensations. 

on the 11th february, for example, it is noted that the men had baked 
meat and suet pudding for the first time since the war began 
on the 13th not one man was even wounded through the whole day 
and night while on the 15th more than half the battalion had hot 
baths for the first time since january. the diaries record these 
facts as of equal importance with a small advance by the french on 
their right, who captured a trench but fell into a nest of angry 
machineguns and had to retire. the battalions share in the work was 
but to assist in keeping the enemys heads down in return for which 
the germans shelled them an hour, killing 1 and wounding 5. our men 
persisted in undercutting the sides of the trench to make dugouts, 
in the belief that unsupported caves of earth were safe against high 
explosives. timbers and framing, indeed material of any kind, were 
still scarce, and doors and boards from wrecked houses were used in 
erecting parapets. sandbags were made out of old petticoats and 
pyjamas, and the farmers fences supplied an indifferent sort of 
wire. sandbags, wires, and stakes did not arrive at the front in 
appreciable quantities till the spring of 1915, and telephones about 
the same date. there was no abundance of any of these things till 
late in 1915 for the country had not made any preparation for war 
till war began, and the price of this was the lives of men. 

the simplicity of our batterywork is shown by the joyous statement 
that we now have a gunner officer to live with us in our 
headquarters in the trenches and a telephone to the battery so that 
fire can be brought to bear quickly on any part of our front as 
necessity arises. at times there would be an error in the signals, 
whereby the battalion coming up from billets to the trenches through 
the dark would be urged to make haste because their section was being 
attacked, and after a breathless arrival would find the artillery 
busied on some small affair away on a flank. 

characteristically enough, the germans when bombarded, as they 
were with effect by the french, would retaliate by shelling our 
lines. the shells worried the irish less than the fact that three 
of their officersmajor the earl of rosse, lieutenant rankin, and 
2nd lieutenant d. parsons, who arrived at 2 a. m. with a draft from 
home, were found to be temporarily attached to the scots guards. 
at that time the battalion was 25 officers and 900 men strong, and 
the wastage from snipers and shells, both in the trench and while 
relieving, was not more than six daily. 

there were reports that the enemy was now mining under the 
brickstacks, so a mining company was formed, and an officer 
experimented successfully in firing riflegrenades pointblank from 
the rifle, instead of parabolically which allowed the enemy time to 
see them descending. this was for the benefit of a few persistent 
snipers seventy yards away who were effectively moved and their 
dugout set ablaze by the new form of attack. 

towards the end of the month our men had finished their 
trenchcleanings and brickingsup, had buried all dead that could 
be got at, and word went round that, if the situation on the 25th 
february could be considered healthy the prince of wales would 
visit them. the germans, perhaps on information received for the 
backareas were thronged with spies, chose that day to be very 
active with a small gun, and as a fresh trench linking up with the 
french on the la basse road had been made and was visible against 
some newfallen snow, they shelled that too. for this reason the 
prince was not taken quite up to the front line, at which he was 
rather annoyed. the precaution was reasonable enough. a few minutes 
after he had left a sector judged comparatively safe 2nd lieutenant 
t. allen was killed by a shell pitching on the parapet there. three 
privates were also killed and 4 wounded by shell or bomb on that 
healthy day. the same gun which had been giving trouble during 
the princes visit was thought to be located by flash somewhere on 
the north side of the la basse road and siegehowitzers kept it 
subdued till the evening of the 25th, when, with the usual german 
scrupulosity, it began to shell the main road, by which reliefs came, 
at tenminute intervals for three hours, but with no casualties as 
far as the irish were concerned. one shell, duly noted, arrived 
near brigade headquarters and a battery of ours was asked to abate 
the nuisance. it is curious that only a few hours later the germans 
were shelling a french battery not far from bthune with teninch 
stuff which, if expended on the main road, would have disorganised 
our reliefs very completely. this was on the eve of going into corps 
reserve at bthune, where the battalion took over the collge de 
jeunes filles from the worcesters, the best billets since the war 
began, but, alas furnished with a large square where drill can take 
place. 

the months losses had been 4 officers and 34 men killed, 5 officers 
and 85 men wounded, or 128 men in all. 

at bthune they enjoyed nine days rest, with steady drill and 
routemarches, concerts in the local theatre, interregimental 
boxing with the 2nd grenadiers, and a divisional football competition 
for a cup presented by the bishop of khartum. here they defeated the 
6th field ambulance and lost by two goals to nil to the oxford and 
bucks l.i. major trefusis, c.o., captain mylne and 2nd lieutenant 
h. marioncrawford went home for a weeks leavefor that wonderful 
experience of first leave was now availablewhile major the earl 
of rosse, who had been recovered from the scots guards, took over 
command. 


neuve chapelle 

by the 9th march every one had returned and with them a draft of a 
hundred men under lieutenant c. wynter, 2nd lieutenant t. e. nugent 
and 2nd lieutenant hon. w. s. p. alexander, just in time to take 
their share in the operations before neuve chapelle. 

this village, which lay four miles under the aubers ridge, at the 
entrance to the open country round lille and tourcoing, had been in 
german hands since smithdorriens corps were turned out of it on 
october 26th and 2zth of the year before. assuming that our troops 
could break through at that point, that no reinforcements could be 
brought up by the germans over all their wellconsidered lines of 
communication, that the aubers ridge could be surrounded and held, 
that cavalry could follow up infantry armed with machineguns across 
trenches and through country studded with fortified posts, it was 
considered, in some quarters, that an attack might be driven through 
even to lille itself. 

our armies, penned for months in the trenches, had suffered heavy 
wastage, though they were being built up from behind with men, 
material and guns on a scale which, by all past standards, was 
enormous. the enemy, with infinitely larger resources, had meantime 
strengthened and restrengthened himself behind belt upon belt of 
barbed wire with uncounted machinegun posts and an artillery of 
high explosives to which the world then held no equal. his hand was 
heavy, too, in offence, and the french armies to the eastward felt it 
as soon as the spring opened. to ease that pressure, to release our 
troops from the burden of mere wasteful waiting, and to break, as far 
as might be, the edge of the enemy at the outset of the 15 campaign, 
were presumably objects of the battle only second to the somewhat 
ambitious project of entering lille. 

neuve chapelle proved in large what the men in the trenches had 
learned in little throughout the winterthat unless artillery 
utterly root out barbedwire trenches, machinegun posts, and 
fortified houses, no valour of attacking infantry can pierce a modern 
defensive line. more than three hundred gunssay 5 per cent. of 
the number that our armies had in the last years of the waropened 
upon neuve chapelle and its defences at z.30 on the morning of march 
10 for half an hour in a bombardment without parallel where the 
fire fell it wiped out everything above the sodden, muddy ground, 
so utterly breaking the defence that for a while the attack of 
rawlinsons fourth army corps went forward with hardly a check 
across shapeless overturned wreckage of men and things. then, at one 
point after another, along the whole bare front, battalions found 
themselves hung up before, or trapped between, breadths of uncut wire 
that covered nests of machineguns, and were withered up before any 
artillery could be warned to their help. this was the fate of the 
6th brigade, whose part in the work on that sector was to capture 
two lines of trenches in front of givenchy. three battalions of 
the 4th guards brigadethe 2nd grenadiers, 1st irish and 2nd 
coldstreamwere attached to it as divisional reserve, and the 
remaining two battalions of the brigadethe 3rd coldstream guards 
and the herts regiment under colonel mathesonas corps reserve. 

the battalion left billets near bthune in the early dawn of the 10th 
march and moved to a wood just north of the airela basse canal, 
where it remained till midnight, when it went forward to take over 
some trenches held by the kings liverpool and south staffords 6th 
brigade whose attack had failed. our guns had only succeeded in 
blowing an inadequate hole or two in the enemys wire which at many 
places was reported as ten yards deep, and the assaulting battalions 
had, as usual, been halted there and cut down. the only consolation 
for the heavy losses in men and officers was the news that the attack 
farther north had gone well and that a thousand germans had been 
captured. 

a fresh attack was ordered on the morning of the 11th, but the 
bombardment was delayed by fog and did so little damage to the 
wire that by afternoon the idea was abandoned, and in the evening 
the 4th guards brigade took over the line that had been held by 
the 6th brigade. they were filthy trenches their parapets were 
not bulletproof, and the houses behind them blown to pieces 
headquarters mess lived in one cellar, the c.o. of the battalion 
slept in another, and the communicationtrenches were far too 
shallow. part of our front had to be evacuated while our bombardment 
was going on as it was too close to the enemy for safe shelling. 
the failure of the 6th brigades attack in this quarter reduced the 
next days operation to a holding affair of rifle and heavygun 
fire, delayed and hampered by the morning fog, and on the 13th march 
the battalion went into billets at le prol. the battle round neuve 
chapelle itself, they were told, had yielded more prisoners but 
heavy german reinforcements were being moved up. 

late that night a draft of eighty n.c.o.s, and men arrived under 
lieutenant j. s. n. fitzgerald, among them the first detachment of 
specially enlisted late r.i. constabularylarge drilled menwho 
were to play so solid a part in the history and the glory of the 
battalion. the strength of the battalion at that moment was 1080 with 
some 26 officersmuch greater than it had been at any time during 
the war. they were all turned into the endless work of cleaning out 
and draining foul trenches, and the dogs life of holding them under 
regular and irregular bombardments. 

it was safer to relieve by daylight rather than by night, as darkness 
brought bursts of sudden rifle and machinegun fire, despatched at a 
venture from behind the fivedeep line of german chevauxdefrise 
not seventy yards away. tempting openings, too, were left in the wire 
to invite attack, but the bait was not taken. neuve chapelle had been 
a failure except in so far as it had shown the enemy that winter had 
not dulled any of our arms, and it was recognized we must continue 
to sit still till men and material should accumulate behind us. the 
documents and diaries of those weeks admit this with the unshaken 
cheerfulness of the race. yet, even so, the actual and potential 
strength of the enemy was not realised. 

very slowly, and always with the thought at the back of the mind 
that the deadlock might break at any moment, the army set itself, 
battalion by battalion, to learn the war it was waging. 

on the 15th of march 2nd lieutenant h. marioncrawford was appointed 
brigade bombing officer to the guards brigade with sixty men under 
him attached to the irish guards. the jampot grenade of 1914 
was practically obsolete by now the stick handgrenade of the 
hairbrush type and the grenade fired from the rifle had succeeded it 
and were appearing on the front in appreciable quantities. the mills 
bomb, which superseded all others both for hand and rifle, was not 
born till the autumn of 1915 and was not lavishly supplied till the 
opening of the next year. 

on the 16th march, or five days after their share of the battle of 
neuve chapelle had ended, and they lay in the trenches, a moaning 
was heard in the darkness of no mans land and a corporal sent out 
to report. he came back saying that he had got into a trench some 
thirty yards from the front line where he had seen a lighted candle 
and heard what he believed to be germans talking. another patrol was 
despatched and at last came back with a wounded man of the kings 
liverpools, who had been lying out since the 10th. he said he had 
been wounded in the assault, captured as he was trying to crawl back, 
stripped of boots, equipment and rations, but left with a blanket, 
and the enemy apparently visited him every night as they patrolled 
the trench. an attempt was made to capture that patrol, but in the 
darkness the trench was missed altogether. 

the enemy celebrated the day before st. patricks day and the day 
itself, march 1z, by several hours of brisk shelling of givenchy, 
timed to catch the evening reliefs, but luckily without casualties. 
queen alexandra sent the battalion their shamrock telegrams wishing 
them good luck were duly received from lord kitchener, colonel of the 
battalion, brigadiergeneral nugent, and a letter from sir charles 
monro commanding the first army corps. father gwynne held an openair 
service in the early morning, and every man was given a hot bath at 
bthune. more important still, every man who wanted it had free beer 
with his dinner, and in those days beer was beer indeed. 

the end of the month was filled with constructive work and the 
linking up and strengthening of trenches, and the burial, where 
possible, of the very old deadtwentynine of them in one dayand 
always unrelaxing watch and ward against the enemy. at times he 
puzzled them, as when one evening he threw bombs just over his own 
parapet till it seemed that he must be busy blowing holes in his 
own deep wire. but it turned out at last to be some new pattern of 
bomb with which he was methodically experimenting. later came a few 
aeroplanes, the first seen in some weeks. it may have been no more 
than a coincidence that the first planes came over on the day that 
the prince of wales was paying the battalion another visit. but it 
was the continuous riflefire at night that accounted for most of the 
casualties in the trenches and during reliefs. second lieutenant t. 
nugent was wounded in the back of the neck on the 24th by an unaimed 
bullet, and almost each day had its count of casualties. 

the battalion took life with philosophic calm. food and rest are the 
paramount considerations of men in war. the former was certain and 
abundant the latter scanty and broken. so the commanding officer 
made no comment when, one night going round the line, he found a man 
deeply asleep with his feet projecting into the fairway and, written 
on a paper on his chest, the legend 

      sleep is sweet undisturbed it is divine, 
      so lift up your feet and do not tread on mine. 

a certain amount of change and interest was given by the appearance 
on the scene of the post office territorials 8th city of london, 
commanded by colonel j. harvey, an exirish guardsman, and a platoon 
of that regiment was attached to the battalion for instructional 
purposes. later, three, and at last seven platoons, were placed at 
the disposal of the irish guards, whose c.o. found them work to do. 
they made themselves quite useful but wanted more practice in 
diggingan experience never begrudged them by the generous irish. 


trenchwork after neuve chapelle 

thanks to neuve chapelle, a breathingspace had been won during 
which territorial troops were taking their place in the front line 
and such supplies as times afforded were coming up. the diary 
records many visits of colonels, brigadiers, and inspectors of the 
territorial forces to this section, which, when it had been brought 
up to the guards standard, was considered a model for instruction. 
the month closed with bright moonlight and the mounting of two motor 
machineguns, one south of ducks bill and the other in oxford 
street, for protection against aeroplanes. 

april opened with the death of 2nd lieutenant j. m. stewart, killed 
before dawn while looking over the parapet of the trench at ducks 
bill, and buried at noon in the cemetery near windy corner. he was 
one of the best of the younger officers of these days and had proved 
himself on many occasions. the lull after neuve chapelle continued, 
the battalion relieving the grenadiers every other day at 6 p. m. 
with almost the regularity of a civilian department. when it was 
fine, aeroplanes, taking no notice of the antiaircraft artillery, 
ranged over them in search of certain heavy naval guns that had been 
reaching into enemy backareas. 

there was very little bombdropping on infantry, and the monotony 
of riflefire and occasional handbombing was only broken when 
our artillery, with a few shells to spare, fired into the enemys 
second line near couteleux, where the germans, behind heavy wire, 
were singing and making much noise. the effort drew a return fire 
of high explosives and a shell wounded 8 and killed 1 man of no. 3 
company. our gunners said that they had killed many more than nine 
germans, but sporadic outbursts of this kind were not well seen in 
the front line, which has to abide the result. as one officer wrote 
i am all for determined bombardment but do not appreciate minor 
ones, though i quite see it makes the enemy use his ammunition. the 
2nd london territorial artillery registered their guns also, for the 
first time, on april 12, and a platoon of the 15th county of london 
with its machinegun was attached to the battalion for instruction. 

it is no sort of discredit to the territorials that at first they did 
not know what to expect in this war, and reading between the lines 
one sees how thoroughly and patiently the regulars performed their 
extra duties of schoolmasters, guides, philosophers, and friends 
to battalions whose most extended training had never dreamed of an 
ordered existence, half underground, where all things but death were 
invisible, and even the transport and tendance of the wounded was a 
mystery of pain and confusion worked out among labyrinths of open 
drains. 

among the distinguished visitors to be shown the trenches was 
lieut.colonel r. s. de haviland of the eton o.t.c.a man of many 
friends in that company. the comeandgo of visitors cheered and 
interested the men in the front trenches, since their presence even 
for a little proved that, somewhere in the world, life continued on 
not inconceivable lines. they jested naturally enough at those who 
looked on for a day or two at their hardships and went away, but 
the hardships were lightened a little by the very jest. even while 
the commandant of the eton o.t.c. was with them the battalion was 
energetically devising means to drain out an unspeakable accumulation 
of stagnant water down hill from a mine near the shrine under the 
white house barricade the white house was scarcely more than a name 
even then into some german trenches at the foot of the slope. this 
work necessitated clearing a ditch by the roadside in which were 
found four german corpses, besides pieces of other human beings, 
which were buried, and in due course the whole flood of abomination 
was decanted on the enemy. as it was very horrible, i dont suppose 
they will like it, writes one of the officers chiefly concerned. 

on the same day, april 16, while 2nd lieutenant h. marioncrawford, 
who it will be remembered was brigade bombing instructor, was 
schooling some men of the 3rd coldstream with live grenades one 
exploded and killed him instantaneously. he had shown the greatest 
ability in organizing the bombing work and his loss at that time, 
where bombers were being more and more leaned upon, was very 
seriously felt. he was buried four hours after his death in the 
cemetery near givenchy. 

on the 1zth the battalion went back to the collge des jeunes filles 
at bthune for a four days rest while its place in the trenches 
was taken by a couple of territorial battalionsthe post office 
rifles and the 15th county of london. while it was routemarched, 
and instructed, and washed and steadily drilled, the battle for hill 
60 was being fought with mines and handgrenades, handmortars, 
and the first gasshells, a score of miles to the north, where it 
was made known to the germans how, man for man, their fresh and 
fullytrained troops could not overcome ours. the demonstration cost 
some three thousand casualties on our side, and, it may be presumed, 
strengthened the enemys intention to use gas on a larger scale in 
the future. but no echo of the little affair interfered with the work 
at givenchy. the question was how the new territorial battalions 
would hold their trenches, and one sees in all the documents a 
justified pride in their teachings when the battalion went up to the 
front again on the 22nd and found the territorials were keen and had 
kept their trenches clean. for the guards teach, not unsuccessfully, 
that unless a man is clean he cannot be the best sort of soldier. 

on the night of the 22nd april the sector was held by the 15th 
county of london, the irish guards and the post office rifles, the 
remainder of the guards brigade being in rest. to the normal strain 
of a watching front line in foul weather was added a fresh burden. a 
few days before, the enemy had blown a mine in an orchard about fifty 
yards short of our trenches. it did no damage at the time, but the 
r.e. mining officer, lieutenant barclay, in countermining towards 
the crater it had made, saw, through the wall of his mine, germans 
engaged in turning the crater into an advancedpost. trenchmortars 
were fired at once to discourage them. then came reports of 
underground workings heard in other directions and, notably, close 
to the parapet of a trench near the white house. this was on the 
evening of the 24th. hardly had orders been given to clear the white 
house trench, when the ground at the junction of lieutenant barclays 
countermine and the german crater went up and the lieutenant was 
killed. at the same time an explosion occurred near the white house. 
two privates of the irish guards 2845 j. mansfield and 39z5 m. 
brine volunteered to enter our mine and see what had happened. 
they recovered lieutenant barclays body at great risk from the 
asphyxiating gases, and both men were recommended for the d.c.m. the 
explosion near the white house was, after inspection, put down as the 
work of a heavy shell, not a mine but listening parties reported 
more underground noises and another section of trench was evacuated 
accordingly. to prevent the germans consolidating themselves further 
in the crater which connected with lieutenant barclays mine, our 
4.5 howitzers bombarded it on the 25th, and it was decided to 
blow our end of the mine as soon as possible to prevent the enemy 
working up it. this was difficult, for the galleries were full of 
foul gaswhether leaking from some adjacent coalpit or laid on by 
the enemy was uncertain. the r.e. officer who went down to lay the 
charges was asphyxiated and several of his men were injured. 

not till the 29th of april were the difficulties overcome by which 
time the enemy had driven a fresh shaft into it. after the explosion, 
a fieldbattery 1zth r.f.a. and the 4zth howitzer battery fired a 
salvo at the german trenches. there was a little riflefire, but 
soon all was quiet. mining, like aerial and bombing work, was still 
in its infancy, and the information supplied by the intelligence was 
said to be belated and inadequate. 

an interesting point is the unshaken serenity with which the men 
took the new developments. they were far too annoyed at being 
shifted about and losing their rest to consider too curiously the 
underlying causes of evil. they left the 3rd coldstream to deal with 
the situation and went into billets in le prol, and the next day 
april 26 into bthune for their hot baths. a draft of 3 officers 
captain t. m. d. bailie and 2nd lieutenants a. w. l. paget and r. 
s. g. paget with 136 n.c.o.s and men reached them on the 2zth, 
when there was just time to give them a hot meal and send them at 
once to the trenches in the bright moonlight under a certain amount 
of riflefire and intermittent shelling from small guns which did 
not do much damage. an enemy fieldgun, long known as an unlocated 
pest, spent the morning busily enfilading the trenches, in spite of 
the assurances of our artillery that they had found and knocked it 
out several times. appeal was made to an r.a. brigadier who, after 
examining the ground, left the battalion under the impression that 
it was likely a gun would be brought up early tomorrow. nothing 
more is heard of the hope but guns were scarce at that time. 

there were other preoccupations for those in command. the second 
battle of ypres, that months miracle of naked endurance against the 
longplanned and coldly thoughtout horror of gas, had begun near 
langemarck with the chokingout of the french and canadian troops, 
and had continued day after day with the sacrifice of battalions 
and brigades, regulars and territorials swallowed up in the low 
greyyellow gas banks that threatened ypres from langemarck to hill 
60, or beaten to pulp by heavy explosives and the remnant riddled 
anew by machineguns. once again england was making good with her 
best flesh and blood for the material and the training she had 
deliberately refused to provide while yet peace held. the men who 
came out of that furnace alive say that no after experience of all 
the war approached it for sheer concentrated, as well as prolonged, 
terror, confusion, and a growing sense of hopelessness among growing 
agonies. if a world, at that time unbroken to german methods, stood 
aghast at the limited revelations allowed by the press censorship 
reports, those who had seen a man, or worse, a child, dying from 
gas may conceive with what emotions men exposed to the new torment 
regarded it, what kind of reports leaked out from clearingstations 
and hospitals, and what work therefore was laid upon officers to 
maintain an even and unaffected temper in the battalions in waiting. 
the records, of course, do not mention these details, nor, indeed, 
do they record when gasprotectors for masks, helmets, and boxes 
were not evolved till much later were first issued to the troops on 
the givenchy sector. but private letters of the 25th april, at the 
time the german mine in the orchard occupied their attention, remark, 
we have all been issued out with an antidote to the latest german 
villainy ... i.e. of asphyxiating gases.... what they will end by 
doing one can hardly imagine. the only thing is to be prepared for 
anything. 

the first masks were little more than mufflers or strips of cloth 
dipped in lime water. a weathercock was rigged up near headquarters 
dugouts, and when the wind blew from the germans these were got 
ready. false alarms of gas, due to strange stenches given off by 
various explosives, or the appearance of a mist over the german 
line, were not uncommon, and on each occasion, it appeared that 
the c.o. had to turn out, sniff, and personally pass judgment on 
the case. the men had their instructions what to do in case of 
emergency, concluding with the simple order, perhaps the result of 
experience at ypres, in event of the first line being overcome, the 
second immediately charge through the gas and occupy the frontline 
trenches. 

but to return to the routine 

the casualties for the month of april were 2 officers and 8 men 
killed and 1 officer and 42 men wounded. the strength of the 
battalion stood at 28 officers and 1133 men, higher than it had ever 
been before. 

the following is the distribution of officers and n.c.o.s at that 
time, a little less than three weeks before the battle of festubert. 


headquarters 

  major the hon. j. f. trefusis      commanding officer. 
  major the earl of rosse            second in command. 
  capt. lord desmond fitzgerald      adjutant. 
  lieut. p. h. antrobus              transport officer. 
  lieut. l. s. straker               machinegun officer. 
  capt. a. h. l. mcarthy            medical officer. 
  lieut. h. hickie                   quartermaster. 
  the rev. john gwynne s.j.        chaplain. 


no. 1 company 

  capt. j. n. guthrie. 
  lieut. r. g. c. yerburgh. 
  2nd lieut. v. w. d. fox. 
  2nd lieut. hon. w. s. p. alexander. 
  no. 2535 c.s.m. harradine. 
  no. 3z26 c.q.m.s. p. mgoldrick. 


no. 2 company 

  capt. e. g. mylne. 
  lieut. sir g. burke, bart. 
  2nd lieut. r. b. h. kemp. 
  2nd lieut. s. g. tallents. 
  no. 3949 c.s.m. d. moyles. 
  no. 2z03 c.q.m.s. j. g. lowry. 


no. 3 company 

  major p. l. reid. 
  2nd lieut. j. r. ralli. 
  2nd lieut. c. pease. 
  2nd lieut. e. w. campbell. 
  2nd lieut. c. de persse attached zth dragoon guards. 
  no. 2112 c.s.m. h. mveigh. 
  no. 39z2 c.q.m.s. r. grady. 


no. 4. company 

  capt. g. e. s. young. 
  lieut. j. s. n. fitzgerald. 
  lieut. c. d. wynter. 
  2nd lieut. d. c. parsons. 
  no. 2384 c.s.m. t. curry. 
  no. 3132 c.q.m.s. h. carton. 

the first ten days of may passed quietly. mines, for the moment, gave 
no further anxiety, bombing and bombardments were light, reliefs 
were happily effected, and but 1 man was killed and 1 wounded. two 
officers, lieutenant h. a. boyse and 2nd lieutenant r. h. w. heard, 
joined on the 2nd. 


the battle of festubert 

it was judged expedient while the second battle of ypres was in full 
heat that the germans should, if possible, be kept from sending any 
help to their front near arras, in artois, which at the time was 
under strong pressure from the french thrusting towards lens. to this 
end, our first army was ordered to attack the german seventh corps 
over the flat ground between laventie and richebourg on a front of 
some ten miles. the affair opened very early on the morning of the 
9th may with a bombardment, imposing in itself by the standards of 
the day, but, as before, insufficient to break the wire or crush 
enough of the machinegun nests. the germans seem to have had full 
information of its coming, and dealt with it severely. the whole 
attack from north to southindian, scottish, territorials, and the 
restwas caught and broken as it rolled against the wellwired 
german trenches. 

the battalion, whose part, then, was to maintain the right of our 
army where it joined the french, heard the french guns open on the 
night of the 8th may, and by dawn the english gunfire was in full 
swing to the northone continuous roar broken by the deep grunt of 
our howitzershells bursting for these were so few that we could 
pick them up by ear. the guards had no concern with these matters 
till the trouble should thicken. their business was to stand ready 
for any counterattack and keep up bursts of rapid fire at intervals 
while they waited for what little news came to hand. it was uniformly 
bad, except that the french in the south seemed to be making some 
headway, and so far as aeroplanes and artillery observers could make 
out, there was no concentration of troops immediately in front of 
them. the germans were too busy with the immediate english front 
to extend their commitments to the southward, and the next two days 
were, for the battalion in their trenches, the quietest that they had 
known for some time. then came orders to hand over to the 1st scots 
guards and rejoin the second division near le touret in readiness 
to carry on the attack which had broken down on the 9th. they 
bivouacked in the open, and the weather turned cold and wet, but the 
men, relieved from the trenches and assured of a change of work, sat 
it out singing songs and playing games in the wet they had been 
forbidden to light fires, lest they should accidentally use the local 
farmers tobaccodrying poles or hedgestuff. and while they waited 
under their mackintosh sheets the armies waited on the weather. a 
fresh attack was to be launched from richebourg by the rue du bois, 
and southward as far as festubert, but, this time, by night not by 
day, and after longer artillery preparation. the 5th and 6th brigades 
were to open it, with the 4th guards brigade in support. it began 
at 11.30 on the 15th, when, at huge cost, something like half a mile 
in breadth and a quarter of a mile in depth of trenches was screwed 
out of the germans by the morning of sunday the 16th. the battalion 
was moved from bivouac in the dawn of that day to support the 5th 
brigade which had not gone so far forward as the 6th, and spent 
the day in trenches at rue du bois under incessant mixed artillery 
fire, which killed 1 man and wounded an officer and 28 menthe 
whole without being able to inflict any damage on the enemy. indeed, 
the survivors of the battle here agreed that they saw no german 
dead other than some corpses left over from previous attacks. they 
returned to bivouac in wet and mist, and on the afternoon of the 1zth 
were, with the 2nd grenadiers, ordered to occupy the line then held 
by the 21st brigade, and to push forward and dig in near a farm cour 
lavoine bristling with machineguns across a stretch of dead flat, 
muddy ground, pitted with waterlogged shellholes. the left was to 
keep touch with the 6th brigade and the right with the grenadiers, 
the whole line facing northeast from quinque rue. 

they extended in the dusk. the left flanking company, no. 4, found no 
sign of the 6th brigade, but received a message from the 5th kings 
battalion that their brigade orders were that the right of that 
battalion should get into touch with the irish but would not be up 
till late so one machinegun was sent to strengthen that companys 
flank. no. 2 company, on the right flank, had reached its objective 
and dug itself in under bursts of raking machinegun and riflefire 
directed against the dykes and bridges, which unfortunately wounded 
both captain mylne and lieutenant kemp, and the company command 
devolved on 2nd lieutenant s. g. tallents. the left flank, meantime, 
was in the air without tools or sandbags, but luckily the night was 
wet and it was allowed to dig itself in unmolested. the casualties 
for the day were only 2 officers wounded, 3 men killed, and 5 wounded. 

the 18th dawned in wreaths of driving rain and mist that wrapped 
the flats. the preliminary bombardment of farm cour lavoine was 
postponed for lack of good light, and in that lull a brigadier 
whose men had already attacked the farm unsuccessfully came 
across the trenches to the battalion and gave his experiences and 
recommendations. the weather made one low cluster of devastated 
buildings seen across the levels look remarkably like any other and 
it seems pure luck that the attack, as originally intended, was not 
launched against the wrong objective. from noon on, the enemy began 
to shell the battalion severely in its shallow trenches, and there 
were forty casualties while they lay awaiting orders. the attack 
began at 4.30 p. m. cour lavoine was then so bombarded by heavy 
shellfire that, as usual, it seemed that nothing in or around it 
could live. but as soon as the attacking companies rose and showed 
over the groundline, the hail of machinegun fire reopened, and 
for the next three hours, the irish suffered in the open and among 
the shellholes, beaten down, as the other battalions had been 
before them, round the piled wreckage of cour lavoine farm. in one 
trench, abandoned by the enemy, they fell into a neat german trap. 
its parapet facing towards the british was bulletproof enough, 
but the parados, though proof against the casual splinters of our 
shrapnel, which had no backblast, had been pared thin enough to 
pass all bullets. consequently, when the trench was occupied, 
accurately ranged machineguns opened on the parados, and riddled 
the men to such an extent that one company had to get out and take 
refuge behind what had been the parapet. the greatest distance gained 
in all was about three hundred yards, and this with their left 
flank still in the air and protected by the one machinegun which 
lieutenant straker, the unflinching enthusiast of the weapon, had 
brought into a communicationtrench. at last they dug in where they 
were the next brigade on the left linked up to the one machinegun 
communicationtrench, and with their old friends the herts battalion 
and the east anglian field company, with whom they had tested mines 
together, they began to consolidate. the c.o. writes i tried to 
find out what officers i had left. out of twentyeight there were 
twelve, but four of these had been left behind with the transport a 
day or two before. of the eight who had come through the affair on 
their feet, only two were absolutely untouched. here is the list 
captain j. n. guthrie and 2nd lieutenant v. w. d. fox, killed by 
shellfire, while leading their companyno. 1to reinforce the 
line 11 officers were wounded, major the earl of rosse very severely 
in the head by a piece of shell major reid, concussion from the 
explosion of a shell captain g. e. s. young, hand lieutenant h. 
t. a. h. boyse, head 2nd lieutenant s. g. tallents, thigh 2nd 
lieutenant j. r. ralli, stomach 2nd lieutenant e. w. campbell, head 
2nd lieutenant hon. w. s. p. alexander, neck 2nd lieutenant r. s. g. 
paget, arm 2nd lieutenant j. k. greer, leg and hand 2nd lieutenant 
c. de persse, head. twentytwo men were killed, 284 wounded, and 86 
missing. the battalion came through it all, defeated, held down at 
long range, but equable in temper and morale. 

small wonder that in the cheerless dawn of the 19th their brigadier 
came and made some complimentary remarks to the men who were 
standing about. 

the four officers who had been left behind were then ordered up to 
fill the gaps, and in that dawn the company commands stood no. 1, 
lieut. r. g. c. yerburgh 2nd lieut. r. h. w. heard. no. 2, lieut. 
sir gerald burke 2nd lieut. a. w. l. paget. no. 3, capt. t. m. d. 
bailie. no. 4, lieut. j. s. n. fitzgerald lieut. c. d. wynter. 

almost at once shelling opened again, and lieutenants burke and paget 
were wounded and 10 men killed or wounded by three high explosives 
bursting right over the line. it was sheer luck that, though 
shelled at intervals for the rest of the day, there were very few 
further casualties, and the battalion returned in small parties 
to their bivouacs near le touret, where a hot meal, greatcoats and 
a rumration awaited them. they were wet, tired, chilled, and caked 
with dirt, and cheerful but next day, when they paraded before going 
into rest while they waited for reinforcements, there was hardly a 
speck of mud to be seen on them. restbillets at lapugnoy, some seven 
or eight miles back, were out of range but not out of hearing of 
the guns, in a valley between delightful beechwoods carpeted with 
bluebells. here they lay off and rejoiced in the novel sight of 
unscathed trees and actual hills. 


from festubert to loos 

on the 24th may general horne came to inspect and complimented them. 
his compliments are nowhere recorded, but it was remarked with 
satisfaction at his parade that the men stood very steady and moved 
their arms well considering that they have not had much practice in 
steady drill lately. they had merely practised unbroken discipline 
among the dead and the dying in a hopeless fight. 

a draft of 126 men, under lieutenant a. f. gordon, arrived, and 
lieutenant r. rankin, who had been attached to the 1st scots guards 
since february, joined them at lapugnoy, and the rev. s. knapp, r.c. 
chaplain from the 25th brigade, took temporary charge of spiritual 
affairs while their own father gwynne, who never spared himself, was 
trying electric treatment in paris for lumbago, induced, as every one 
knew, by unsparing exposure. 

on the 25th may they moved from lapugnoy via chocques to oblinghem, 
some five miles to the northeast, a village of many and varied 
smells, close to an aerodrome where they lay at a moments notice, 
which meant that no one could take off his boots. a new type of 
gasmask was issued here, and the men drilled in the use of it. 
captain a. h. l. mccarthy, the medical officer who had been with them 
since october 25, accidentally broke his arm, and his duties were 
taken over by lieutenant l. w. bain, r.a.m.c. 

on the 28th may a draft of 214 n.c.o.s, and men under lieutenant l. 
r. hargreaves, 2nd lieutenants n. f. durant and l. c. whitefoord, 
arrived, and the next day 29th twelve more officers came in from 
england major g. h. c. madden captain v. c. j. blake captain 
m. v. gorelangton 2nd lieutenant j. t. robyns 2nd lieutenant 
k. e. dormer 2nd lieutenant hon. h. b. obrien 2nd lieutenant 
r. j. p. rodakowski 2nd lieutenant k. w. hogg 2nd lieutenant j. 
graylingmajor 2nd lieutenant f. h. witts 2nd lieutenant w. b. 
stevens 2nd lieutenant p. h. j. close bringing the battalion up to 
28 officers and 958 other ranks. 

headquarters and companies then stood as follows 


headquarters 

  major the hon. j. f. trefusis      commanding officer. 
  major g. h. madden                 second in command. 
  capt. lord desmond fitzgerald      adjutant. 
  lieut. p. h. antrobus              transport officer. 
  2nd lieut. l. s. straker           machinegun officer. 
  the rev. s. knapp                  chaplain. 
  lieut. l. w. bain                  medical officer. 
  lieut. h. hickie                   quartermaster. 


no. 1 company 

  capt. m. v. gorelangton. 
  lieut. r. c. g. yerburgh. 
  2nd lieut. f. h. witts. 
  2nd lieut. r. h. w. heard. 
  2nd lieut. j. graylingmajor. 


no. 2 company 

  capt. t. w. d. bailie. 
  lieut. r. rankin. 
  2nd lieut. w. b. stevens. 
  2nd lieut. k. e. dormer. 
  2nd lieut. l. c. whitefoord. 
  2nd lieut. hon. h. b. obrien. 


no. 3 company 

  capt. v. c. j. blake. 
  lieut. c. d. wynter. 
  2nd lieut. j. t. robyns. 
  2nd lieut. n. f. durant. 
  2nd lieut. k. w. hogg. 


no. 4 company 

  lieut. j. s. n. fitzgerald. 
  lieut. l. r. hargreaves. 
  2nd lieut. a. f. l. gordon. 
  2nd lieut. p. h. j. close. 
  2nd lieut. r. j. p. rodakowski. 

there is no hint of the desperate hard work of the 2nd, reserve, 
battalion at warley, which made possible the supply at such short 
notice of so many officers of such quality. these inner workings of 
a regiment are known only to those who have borne the burden. 

on the 31st may the 4th guards brigade was shifted from oblinghem 
to billets near the most unpleasing village of nuxlesmines, 
farther south than they had ever been before, as divisional reserve 
to a couple of brigades of the 2nd division in trenches recently 
taken over from the french. the brigade moved off in two columns, 
through bthune down the main road to arras, where they were seen by 
the germans and shelled both en route and as they were billeting, 
but, as chance chose, without accident. the billets were good, 
though, like most in the early days, they needed cleansing, and 
a rumour went about that the trenches to which the battalion was 
assigned were peculiarly foul, in very bad shape and would probably 
need remaking throughout. 

bombing classes with a new and an absolutely safe bomb mills, 
the routine of company drills and exercise, sports and an eton 
dinner on the 4th june, filled the warm, peaceful days till it left 
nuxlesmines for saillylabourse. this was not the sector they had 
expected, but one farther to the north and nearer cuinchy. their 
trenches were an unsatisfactory line with insufficient traverses, 
not too many dugouts, and inadequate parapets facing fields of 
fastgrowing corn, which marked the german front two hundred yards 
away. they were reached from cambrin through a mile and a half of 
communicationtrenches, up which every drop of water had to be 
carried in tins. a recent draft of fifty had increased the battalion 
to over a thousand men, and, apparently by way of breaking in the 
new hands, it was suggested that the battalion should dig a complete 
new line of trenches. they compromised, however, by improving the 
existing one, which they shared with the 2nd grenadiers, changing 
over on the 12th june to a stretch of fifteen hundred yards, held by 
the 2nd coldstream. this necessitated three companies instead of two 
in the front line and the fourth in support. 

the enemy here confined themselves to shelling timed to catch 
reliefs, but rarely heavy enough to interfere with workingparties 
digging or wiring in the tough chalk. on one occasion a selection 
of coloured lights, red, green, and white, had been sent up for 
the battalions to test. they chose a night when the enemy was 
experimenting on a collection of lights of his own, but soon 
discovered that rocketlights were inadvisable, as their fiery tails 
gave away positions and drew fire. this disadvantage might have 
been found out in england by the makers instead of at 1 a. m. by a 
wearied commanding officer, whose duty was to link up and strengthen 
his trenches, keep an eye on the baffling breadths of corn in front 
of him, send reconnoitring parties out on all possible occasions, 
procure wire and engineers to set it up, and at the same time keep 
all men and material in readiness for any possible attack that might 
develop on the heels of the bombardments that came and went like the 
summer thunderstorms along the tense line. 

sometimes they watched our own shells bursting in the german trenches 
opposite givenchy, where the battalion had stayed so long sometimes 
they heard unexplained french fire to the southward. next day would 
bring its rumours of gains won and lost, or warnings to standto 
for expected counterattacks that turned out to be no more than 
the rumble of german transport, heard at night, moving no one knew 
whither. when our stinted artillery felt along the enemys trenches 
in front of themfor the high corn made no mans land blind and 
patrolwork difficultthe german replies were generally liberal and 
not long delayed. 

on the 1zth june one such outburst of ours loosed an hours heavy 
shelling, during which staffcaptain the hon. e. w. brabazon 
coldstream, on his rounds to look at a machinegun position under 
the battalion machinegun officer, lieutenant straker, was killed 
by a shell that fell on the top of the dugout. lieutenant straker, 
who was sitting in the doorway, had his foot so pinned in the fallen 
timber that it took an hour to extricate him. captain brabazon, in 
the dugout itself, was crushed by a beam. he was buried at cambrin 
next morning at nine oclock, while the battalion was repairing the 
damage done to the blownin trenches and the french were fighting 
again in the south. 

the brotherly herts battalion had been doing all the work of digging 
in their rear for some time past, and on the 20th the battalion 
took over their fatiguework and their billets at annequin and 
cambrin, while the herts went to the front line. it was hot work in 
that weather to extend and deepen unending communicationtrenches 
that cut off all the air. the prince of wales looked in on them at 
annequin and watched the german guns searching for a heavy battery 
which had gone elsewhere. the movements of the heir to the crown, 
even as guardedly recorded in this diary, not to mention others, and 
the unofficial stories of his appearance, alone, on a bicycle or 
afoot in places of the most unhealthy character, must have been a 
cause of considerable anxiety to those in charge of him. he spent 
his birthday june 23 visiting along the line, which happened to be 
quiet after a bombardment of annequin the day before. the place drew 
much fire at that time, as one of our batteries lay in front of it, 
and a high coal dump, used as an observationpost, just behind it. 
the battalion was still on fatigues, and, in spite of many rumours 
and alerts, had suffered very little. indeed, the total casualties 
of june were but 2 men killed and an officer and 22 men wounded. 
meantime, the new drafts were learning their work. 

the really serious blow they took was the departure at the months 
end of lord cavan, their brigadier, to command the fiftieth 
division. they had known and loved him as a man who understood their 
difficulties, who bore his share, and more, of their hardships, and 
whose sympathy, unsparing devotion and, above all, abounding cheery 
commonsense, had carried them at every turn so far through the 
campaign. 

he bid them farewell at bthune on the 28th, where they were in 
restbillets, in these words 

  i have come to say goodbye to you, as i have to go away and take 
  command of the fiftieth division. i wish to thank the irish guards 
  for all they have done since they have been under my command. 
  before the war they had had no opportunity of proving themselves 
  worthy to take their place in the brigade of guards. but during the 
  course of this war they have always conducted themselves worthy 
  of taking their place with the other illustrious regiments of the 
  brigade of guardsand more so. it is part of all of you young 
  officers, who have taken the place of those who have fallen, to 
  keep up the reputation of the battalion, and you have a difficult 
  task, as its reputation is very high. i need hardly say how much 
  i feel leaving the 4th guards brigade, and i would rather remain 
  its brigadier than be a fieldmarshal elsewhere. 

  general feilding, whom you all know, is coming to take my place, 
  and i could not leave you in better hands. i wish you all luck. 

his special farewell order ran 

  28th june 1915. 

  on leaving the brigade to take command of a division it would not 
  be seemly to recall the various actions since 18th september in 
  which it has been my privilege and my delight to command you, but 
  i may say thiswhether in action, in trenches, or in billets, no 
  unit of the 4th guards brigade has ever disappointed me, nor has 
  any battalion ever fallen short of that great standard set us by 
  our predecessors. 

  we welcomed the 1st herts territorials at ypres, and most worthily 
  have they borne their part with the rest of us. 

  to you all i convey the gratitude of a very full heart, and i wish 
  you goodbye and god speed. 

  sd. cavan, 
  brigadiergeneral 
  commanding 4th guards brigade. 

and for recognition of their work in the trenches for the past three 
weeks, the following was sent from the g.o.c. second division to the 
officer commanding the irish guards 

  the brigadiergeneral has received the following letter from the 
  g.o.c. second division, and he would like c.o.s to arrange that 
  all the men hear it, so that they may realise how fully their 
  splendid efforts are appreciated both by general horne and himself 

  since the 4th guards brigade went into z section on june 
  6, it has really done splendid work. in addition to opening up 
  and deepening the communicationtrenches and the construction of 
  several different minor works in rear, you have dug and wired a 
  new line across a front of at least 2000 yards. the 4th guards 
  brigade and the 11th company r.e. have done great work on many 
  previous occasions, but i think that this last achievement 
  surpasses them all. 

  26th june 1915. 

  the c.o. directs that the above is read to all platoons, and not 
  more than one platoon at a time. 

  sd. desmond fitzgerald, 
  captain adjutant, 
  1st battalion irish guards. 

  26th june 1915. 

it was the brigadiers reference to their having proved themselves 
worthy to take place with the other regiments of the brigade of 
guards, and more so, that delighted them most for the battalion 
felt that it had won its spurs in every field. yet, for all that, the 
diary which, under the wellworn official phrases, represents the 
soul of the regiment and knows how that soul is made and tempered, 
emphasizes the fact that at bthune there are some quite good 
paradegrounds, where a good deal of steady drill will be carried 
out and plenty of country for routemarching, where the men could 
learn how to bear themselves without budging beneath the casual 
shells that dropped miles behind the line. 

so they rested at bthune and gave a concert in the theatre, to 
which they invited many inhabitants of the town who, being new to 
the manners and customs of the irish, could not understand much, 
but a french officer sang the marseillaise with great effect, and 
at dinner afterwards, when the prince of wales was among the guests, 
there were not only red and white roses on the table, but, according 
to one account, silver spoons and forks, provided by the owner of 
the house. if bthune did not yet comprehend the songs of these wild 
outlanders, it had full confidence in them. 


cuinchy 

the first week of july saw them returned to their own old trenches 
at cuinchythe fifty times foughtover line that ran from the la 
basse canal to within a hundred yards of the la bassebthune 
road. a couple of companies of the herts, one on each side of the 
la basse road, lay on their right, and right of those again, the 
2nd coldstream. they boasted as many as six machineguns in position 
belonging to the battalion, and three to the 2nd grenadiers, their 
relief. the trenches had not improved by use since february. there 
were minecraters directly in front of them, their opposing edges 
occupied by our men and the enemy the breastworks were old bursten 
sandbags firesteps had broken down, dugouts were inadequate 
against the largesize trenchmortar bombs that the germans were 
using, and generally the condition and repair of things was 
heartbreaking to the newcomers and their brigadier, who spent most 
of his time, night and day, in the front line. 

annequin, where two of the companies were billeted, had become more 
than ever a shelltrap full of english batteries for which the 
germans were constantly searching and, since experts told them 
that we now had got the upper hand of the enemy at mining, the 
cynical expected that, at any moment, some really big mine would 
go up beneath them. as an interlude, the companies in billets were 
employed in making dugouts without any material which trifling task 
they somehow accomplished. the big shells and the bombing from the 
trenchmortars forced them to deepen all dugouts to ten or twelve 
feet. these were shored with bricks and topped with rails as material 
became more plentiful. 

on the 1zth july captain a. h. l. mccarthy, r.a.m.c., who had broken 
his arm at lapugnoy six weeks before, returned to duty and was 
made welcome. his sickleave, which he seems to have filled with 
beseeching letters to the c.o., had been darkened by a prospect 
of being detached from the battalion and sent to the dardanelles. 
father gwynne, also, came back from his two months rheumatism 
cure, relieving father knapp. he was not quite restored and so was 
forbidden by the c.o., to show himself in the front line for at least 
ten days. it is to be hoped that he obeyed, but in a battalion where 
the call for the priest goes out with, or before, the call for 
stretcherbearers, neither shepherds nor flock are long separated 
under any circumstances. they tell the tale of one of their priests 
who, utterly wearied, dropped for an hours sleep in a trench that 
was being deepened under fire. he was roused by a respectful whisper 
from the workingparty weve dug to your head an your feet, 
father, an now, if youll get up, well dig out under the length of 
ye. 

the brigades system of fortyeight hours reliefs enabled them 
to do more in a given time than battalions who went in for four 
days at a stretch, as a man could carry two days rations on him 
without drawing on the fatigueparties, and the knowledge he would 
be relieved at the end of the time kept his edge. a brigadier 
of experience could tell any section of the line held by the 
brigade as far as he could see it, simply from the demeanour of 
the workingparties. this state of things was only maintained 
by unbroken discipline and the gospel that if one man can keep 
himself comparatively clean in all that dirt and confusion every 
one else can. it behoved the battalion, also, to make and leave a 
good name among the french upon whom they were quartered, as well 
as with the enemy over against them. they were at that time, as 
for long afterwards, almost unmixed irish, and for that reason, 
the relations between officers and men were unlike anything that 
existed elsewhere, even in nominally pure irish battalions. if there 
be any mystery in the training of war that specially distinguishes 
the brigade of guards from their fellows it is that the officers 
lie under discipline more exacting than that of the rank and file 
and that even more than in any other branch of the service they 
are responsible for the comfort of their men. forced together as 
they were in the stark intimacy of the trenches, that at any moment 
may test any soul to the uttermost revealed to each other, every 
other day at least, in the long and wearisome march to billets, 
where the companies and platoons move slowly and sideways through 
the communicationtrenches, gambling against deathif the german 
heavies are busyat each step of the road, officers and men came 
to a mutual comprehension and affectionwhich in no way prevented 
the most direct and drastic criticism or penaltiesas impossible 
to describe as it would be to omit, since it was the background 
against which their lives ran from day to day. the celts national 
poise and manner, his gift of courtesy and sympathy, and above all 
the curious and communicable humour of his outlook in those days 
made it possible for him and his officers to consort together upon 
terms perhaps debarred to other races. when the men practised crime 
they were thorough and inventive in the act and unequalled in the 
defence as the records of some courtmartials testify. but the same 
spirit that prompted the large and imaginative sin and its unexpected 
excuse or justification as, for example, that three sinners detected 
in removing a large cask of beer were but exercising their muscles 
in rowling it a piece along the pav bred a crop of forceful 
regimental characters. many, very many of these, have perished and 
left no record save the echo of amazing or quaint sayings passed from 
mouth to mouth through the long years or a blurred record of some 
desperately heroic deed, lightheartedly conceived and cunningly 
carried through to its triumphant end and dismissed with a jest. the 
unpredictable incidence of death or wounds was a mystery that gave 
the irish full rein for sombre speculation. half an hours furious 
bombardment, with trenches blowing in by lengths at a time, would 
end in no more than extra fatigues for the disgusted workingparties 
that had to repair damage. on another day of still peace, one sudden 
light shell might mangle every man in a bay, and smear the duckboards 
with blood and horrors. a nightpatrol, pinned down by a german 
flare, where they sprawled in the corn, and machinegunned till 
their listening comrades gave up all hope, would tumble back at last 
into their own trenches unscathed, while far back in some sheltered 
corner the skied bullet, falling from a mile and a half away, would 
send a man to his account so silently that, till the body slid off 
the estaminet bench, his neighbours never guessed. the ironies and 
extravagances of fate were so many, so absurd, and so terrible, 
that after a while human nature ceased to take conscious account of 
them or clutched at the smallest trifles that could change a minds 
current. the surest anodyne and one that a prudent commanding officer 
took care to provide was that all hands should have plenty to do. 
to repair a breach or to cut a firestep was not enough. there was 
a standard in these matters to be lived up to, which was insisted 
upon through all the days of trenchwarfare. none knew how long the 
deadlock would last or when the enemy, wearied of mining, bombs, and 
heavy artillery, might attempt a breakthrough. when the first line 
was cleaned and consolidated and finished with what was deemed then 
ample dugout accommodation, supporting parties behind it had to be 
brought up to a like level and so on. 

the enemy at that time, on that line, interfered very little. 
they rigged a searchlight on one of the brickstacks in their 
possession one evening, but took it down after our guns had 
protested. occasionally they shelled bthune, while trying to hit 
an observationballoon near the town and sometimes they bombed 
with trenchmortars. there were, however, days on end when nothing 
could stir them up, or when a few authoritative warnings from our 
guns would cut short a demonstration almost as it began. they were 
bombed for some hours to keep them out of the craters and to cover 
our men at work. in this work no. 4906 private henry won the d.c.m. 
in continuing to throw bombs though twice wounded the irish are 
gifted at hurling things till he was at last ordered off the field. 
the enemy replied with everything except riflefire and in the 
darkness of a rainy night his machineguns caused some annoyance, 
till, after our artillery had failed to find them, the battalion 
trenchmortars silenced them and allowed us to finish digging the new 
trenches and sap. the whole affair lasted four hours and was carried 
out by no. 1 company, under captain m. v. gorelangton, at the cost 
of 1 man killed, 1 officer, lieutenant the hon. h. a. v. harmsworth, 
slightly wounded, and z men wounded. 

on the 3rd august lieutenant h. f. law was sent out with a patrol 
to examine yet another minecrater close to the two which the 
battalion had occupied on its first night. he threw bombs into it, 
found it empty, and the companies began at once to dig up to it from 
two points and make it all their own. the enemy interfered with 
the workingparties for a while but was bombed off. at daybreak he 
retaliated with a methodical bombardment along the line of seveninch 
minenwerfersone every three minutesfor an hour and a half. these 
could be seen dropping perpendicularly ere they exploded but they 
did no great damage, and the rest of the day was peaceful till a 
sudden thunderstorm made everything and everybody abominably dirty. 
additional fatigues are always more resented than any additional 
risks of death. 

when they came up again on the 6th august they found that an enemy 
mine in the orchard had exploded, wounding several of the grenadiers 
whom they were relieving, and done damage to some of our own work. 
while they were making good, the mining company overheard germans at 
work in a gallery a few feet from one of ours. the men were withdrawn 
at once from the forward line till dawn, when our mine was sprung to 
anticipate enemy action. it might have injured some of the enemys 
work, but it certainly disorganized several of our own sapheads 
which had to be redug. 

into the variegated activities of that morning dropped a staff 
officer of the first army corps anxious to get the c.o.s notes and 
instructions on mining for new troops who might later have to hold 
that line in accordance with the manner taught by experience. 
captain j. h. t. priestman of the lincolnshires, a sandhurst 
instructor, arrived with him and was attached to the sector for a 
few days to see how things were carried on. as he was being taken 
round the trenches by the c.o. and the adjutant, next morning, a 
private, on sentry with a bomber, tried to throw a bomb on his own 
account, but, says the diary, not knowing how to, he blew himself up 
and wounded the bomber. by breakfast time the enemy were shelling 
the line in enfilade from the direction of auchy and two men were 
blown to pieces. a couple of hours later the bombardment was repeated 
with, from first to last, 6 killed and 9 wounded. the instructor was 
but one of many whose unregarded duty was to study at first hand 
every device of the enemy in action and to lecture upon it at the 
trainingcentres in england a few days later. 

the battalion relieved the grenadiers once more on the 10th august, 
after another german mine had been exploded on the salient, and had 
carried away so much german wire that it seemed possible to effect 
an entry into their trenches across the newmade crater. a patrol 
under lieutenant a. f. l. gordon was therefore sent out at night but 
reported the slopes too steep to climb and, since another mine had 
gone up and destroyed four of our own sapheads with it, the night 
was spent in repairing these under intermittent bombfire on both 
sides. 

on the 11th august fresh attempts were made to work some sort of 
foothold across the craterpitted ground into the enemys trenches, 
specially at the spot where a crater had been partially filled 
up by the explosion of a fresh mine. the day was quiet. captain 
m. v. gorelangton spent the evening of it in reconnoitring the 
enemys wire, went out across the partly filled crater, found yet 
another crater which ran into the enemys line, and there met one 
german lying out within a few yards of him, whom private dempsey, 
his orderly, killed, thereby rousing the enemy in that particular 
point. they opened with bombs on a party of ours at work on a sap 
in one of the innumerable craters, and were discomfited for the 
moment. an hour later, captain gorelangton, with one man, went 
out for the second time across the same crater to put up some more 
wire. he fell into the arms of a german bombing party, was knocked 
down thrice by explosions of bombs around him and only got back 
to the trenches with great difficulty. the c.o., colonel trefusis, 
then remonstrated with him on the grounds that it is not the 
company commanders business to go out wiring. on the heels of 
this enterprise, a really vicious fight with machineguns as well 
as bombs developed in the dark. it was silenced by four rounds 
of our howitzers when the roar of the bombs stopped as though by 
order. a third affair broke out just on dawn when our men found 
enemy workingparties in craters below them and bombed with them 
exceedingly, for the germans were not good longrange throwers. 

on the morning of the 12th august came general horne to look at the 
position, which he examined leisurely from every part of the line 
instead of merely through the covered loopholes which had been built 
for his convenience. i was glad when i got him safely out of it, 
wrote the c.o., for one never knows when bombs may come over. just 
before they were relieved, the c.o., colonel trefusis, was telephoned 
word that he was to command the 20th brigade and was pathetically 
grieved at his promotion. he hated leaving the battalion which, after 
eleven months of better or worse, he had come to look upon as his 
own. no man could possibly wish to command a better. he was going to 
a brigade where he knew no one, and his hope was that he might be 
allowed to remain one day more with the battalion when it goes to 
the trenches before going into reserve. he had his wish when they 
went into the line on the 14th august, and he faced the ordeal, worse 
than war, of saying goodbye to each company in the morning, and at 
evening went round to make sure that the night companies had plenty 
of bombers in the proper places. bombs were the one tool at that 
time which could deal with nests of occupied craters, and since the 
work was dangerous the irish were qualifying for it with zeal and 
interest, even though they occasionally dropped or released bombs by 
accident. 

they were relieved august 15 by a battalion from the 5th brigade, 
who had heard all sorts of dreadful stories about the position. 
but i told them, said colonel trefusis, it was not so bad, 
provided their bombers kept on bombing at night. mines, of course, 
one cannot help, and the only way to minimise their effect is to keep 
as few men in the front line as possible. 

and so, colonel the hon. j. trefusis passes out of the battalions 
story, to his new headquarters and his new staff and bombing 
officers, and his brandnew troops, who simply out of curiosity to 
see what was going on put their heads over the parapet while under 
instruction and so lost two men shot through the head, which i hope 
will be a lesson to them. 

he had commanded the battalion since november, 1914, and no sudden 
occasion had found him wanting. the diary says it is impossible 
to say all that he has done for the battalion, and indeed, 
high courage, unbroken humour, a cool head, skill, and infinite 
unselfishness are difficult things to set down in words. he was 
succeeded in the command by major g. h. c. madden who arrived from 
england on the 16th august, when the battalion was in rest at bthune 
and the hands of their company and platoon officers were closing upon 
them to make sure once more that such untidy business as mining, 
countermining, and craterfighting had not diminished smartness 
on parade. this was doubly needful since the 4th guards brigade 
ceased, on the 19th august, to be part of the first army and became 
the 1st guards brigade in the newly formed guards division of four 
battalions grenadiers, four coldstream, two scots, two irish, and the 
welsh guards. 

the 2nd battalion of the irish guards, raised at warley, left england 
for france on the 1zth august. 

preparations on what was then considered an overwhelming scale, 
were under way to break the german line near loos while the french 
attacked seriously in the champagne country the idea being to 
arrive at the longdreamedof battle of manuvre in the plain 
of the scheldt. guns, gassmoke apparatus, and material had been 
collected during the summer lull existing communications had been 
more or less improved, though the necessity for feederrailways was 
not at all realised, tanks were not yet created, and the proportion 
of machineguns to infantry was rather below actual requirements. 
as compared with later years our armies were going into action with 
hammers and their bare hands across a breadth of densely occupied, 
tunnelled and elaborately fortified mining country where, as one 
writer observed there is twice as much below ground as there 
is above. consequently, for the third or fourth time within a 
twelvemonth, england was to learn at the cost of scores of thousands 
of casualties that modern warfare, unlike private theatricals, does 
not come right at the performance unless there have been rehearsals. 

the training of the men in the forms of attack anticipated went 
forward energetically behind the front lines, together with 
arrangements for the massing and distribution of the seventy thousand 
troops of the first army first and fourth corps assigned to the 
attack. for the next six weeks or so the irish guards were under 
instruction to that end, and the trenches knew them no more. 

there was a formal leavetaking as they left bthune for st. hilaire, 
when the ex4th guards brigade was played out of bthune by the 
band of the 1st kings liverpools and marched past general horne 
commanding the second division between lines of cheering men. a 
company of the trusty herts territorials, who had been with the 
brigade since 1914, took part in the ceremony. it was repeated next 
day before sir douglas haig at champagne and again in the central 
square of st. omer, when sir john french thanked all ranks for the 
splendid services they had rendered and was much impressed with 
their soldierlike bearing. 

majorgeneral hornes special farewell order ran as follows 

  18th august 1915. 

  the 4th guards brigade leaves the second division tomorrow. 
  the g.o.c. speaks not only for himself, but for every officer, 
  noncommissioned officer, and man of the division when he expresses 
  sorrow that certain changes in organisation have rendered necessary 
  the severance of ties of comradeship commenced in peace and 
  cemented by war. 

  for the past year, by gallantry, devotion to duty, and sacrifice 
  in battles and in the trenches the brigade has maintained the 
  high traditions of his majestys guards and equally by thorough 
  performance of duties, strict discipline, and the exhibition of 
  many soldierlike qualities, has set an example of smartness which 
  has tended to raise the standard and elevate the morale of all with 
  whom it has been associated. 

  majorgeneral horne parts from brigadiergeneral feilding, the 
  officers, noncommissioned officers, and men of the 4th guards 
  brigade with lively regrethe thanks them for their loyal support, 
  and he wishes them good fortune in the future. 

  sd. j. w. robinson, 
  lieut.colonel, 
  a.a.  q.m.g. second division. 

general haig on the 20th august handed the following special order of 
the day to the brigade commander 

  headquarters 1st army, 
  20th august 1915. 

  the 4th guards brigade leaves my command today after over a 
  year of active service in the field. during that time the brigade 
  has taken part in military operations of the most diverse kind and 
  under very varied conditions of country and weather, and throughout 
  all ranks have displayed the greatest fortitude, tenacity, and 
  resolution. 

  i desire to place on record my high appreciation of the services 
  rendered by the brigade and my grateful thanks for the devoted 
  assistance which one and all have given me during a year of 
  strenuous work. 

  sd. d. haig, 
  general commanding 1st army. 

and the reward of their confused and unclean work among the craters 
and the tunnels of the past weeks came in the commanderinchiefs 
announcement 

  guards division, 

  the commanderinchief has intimated that he has read with great 
  interest and satisfaction the reports of the mining operations and 
  crater fighting which have taken place in the second division area 
  during the last two months. 

  he desires that his high appreciation of the good work performed 
  be conveyed to the troops, especially to the 1z0th and 1z6th 
  tunnelling cos. r.e., the 2nd battalion irish guards, the 1st 
  battalion k.r.r.c., and the 2nd battalion south staffordshire 
  regiment. 

  the g.o.c. second division has great pleasure in forwarding this 
  announcement. 

  sd. h. p. horne, 
  majorgeneral, 
  commanding second division. 

  second division, 
  21.8.15. 

they lay at eperlecques for a day or two on their way to thiembronne, 
a hot nineteenmile march during which only five men fell out. it was 
at st. pierre between thiembronne and acquin that they met and dined 
with the 2nd battalion of the regiment which had landed in france 
on the 18th august. there are few records of this historic meeting 
for the youth and the strength that gathered by the cookers in that 
open sunlit field by st. pierre has been several times wiped out and 
replaced. the two battalions conferred together, by rank and by age, 
on the methods and devices of the enemy the veterans of the first 
enlightening the new hands of the second with tales that could lose 
nothing in the telling, mixed with practical advice of the most grim. 
the first promptly christened the second the irish landsturm, and a 
young officer, who later rose to eminent heights and command of the 
2nd battalion sat upon a table under some trees, and delighted the 
world with joyous songs upon a concertina and a mouthorgan. then 
they parted. 


loos 

the next three weeks were spent by the 1st battalion at or near 
thiembronne in training for the great battle to come. they were 
instructed in marchdiscipline, infantry attack, extendedorder 
drill and fieldtraining, attacks on villages drionville was one 
of them selected and the french villagers attended the fieldday 
in great numbers as well as in bussing and debussing against 
time into motorbuses which were then beginning to be moderately 
plentiful. regimental sports were not forgottenthey were a 
great success and an amusement more or less comprehensible to the 
people of thiembronneand, since the whole world was aware that 
a combined attack would be made shortly by the english and french 
armies, the officers of the guards brigade were duly informed by 
lieutenantgeneral haking, commanding the eleventh army corps, to 
which the guards division belonged, that such, indeed, was the case. 

the domestic concerns of the battalion during this pause include the 
facts that 2nd lieutenant dameslongsworth from the 2nd middlesex 
was attached on the 9th september prior to transfer to the irish 
guards captain c. d. wynter, lieutenant f. h. witts, and 2nd 
lieutenant w. b. stevens were transferred september 10, from the 
1st to the 2nd battalion and 2nd lieutenant t. k. walker and t. h. 
langrishe transferred on the same day from the 2nd to the 1st, while 
orderlyroom quartermastersergeant j. halligan, of whom later, was 
gazetted a 2nd lieutenant to the leinster regiment. captain l. r. 
hargreaves was on the 13th permitted to wear the badge of captain 
pending his temporary promotion to that rank being announced in the 
london gazette, and the c. o., major g. h. c. madden, was on the 
6th september gazetted a temporary lieutenantcolonel. these were the 
first grants of temporary rank in the battalion. 

on the 18th september the c.o.s of all the battalions in the guards 
division motored to the bthune district, where a reconnaissance 
was made from convenient observationposts of the country between 
cuinchy and loos that they might judge the weight of the task before 
them. 

it was a jagged, scarred, and mutilated sweep of miningvillages, 
factories, quarries, slagdumps, pitheads, chalkpits, and railway 
embankmentsall the plant of an elaborate mechanical civilization 
connected above ground and below by every means that ingenuity and 
labour could devise to the uses of war. the ground was trenched and 
tunnelled with cemented and floored works of terrifying permanency 
that linked together fortified redoubts, observationposts, concealed 
batteries, rallyingpoints, and impregnable shelters for waiting 
reserves. so it ran along our front from grenay north of the plateau 
of notre dame de lorette, where two huge slagheaps known as the 
double crassier bristled with machineguns, across the bare interlude 
of crop land between loos and hulluch, where a high german redoubt 
crowned the slopes to the village of haisnes with the low and 
dangerous hohenzollern redoubt south of it. triple lines of barbed 
wire protected a system of triple trenches, concretefaced, holding 
dugouts twenty feet deep, with lifts for machineguns which could 
appear and disappear in emplacements of concrete over iron rails 
and the observationposts were capped with steel cupolas. in the 
background ample railways and a multitude of roads lay ready to 
launch fresh troops to any point that might by any chance be forced 
in the face of these obstacles. 

our armies were brought up for the most part on their own feet and 
lay in trenches not in the least concreted nor were our roads 
to the front wholly equal to the demands on them. the assaulting 
troops were the first and fourth army corps less some troops 
detached to make a feint at festubert and cuinchy disposed in the 
trenches south from the line of the bthunela basse canal to the 
vermelleshulluch road. their work, as laid down, was to storm 
auchyla basse, haisnes, capture the hohenzollern redoubt to the 
southwest of it and the immensely fortified minehead pit 8 with 
which it was connected, the hulluch quarries, equally fortified, and 
the long strip of wood beside them, and the village of cit st. elie 
between hulluch and haisnes. south of the vermelleshulluch road, 
the fourth army corps was to occupy the high ground between loos and 
lens, including the redoubt on hill 69 all the town of loos, which 
was a museum of veiled deaths, the double crassier, the chalkpit, 
the redoubt on hill z0 on the looshaisnes road, and the village of 
cit st. auguste. after which, doubtless, the way would be open to 
victory. the eleventh army corps formed the main infantry reserve 
and included the newly formed guards division, the twentyfirst and 
twentyfourth divisions of the new army and the twentyeighth. the 
twentyfirst and twentyfourth were brought up between beuvry and 
nuxlesmines the twentyeighth to bailleul, while the guards 
division lay in reserve near lillers, ten miles northwest or so 
from souchez the third cavalry division near sainsengohelle, and 
the british cavalry corps at bailleullespernes ten miles west of 
nuxlesmines, in attendance on the expected breakthrough. 

on the 21st september the battalion was inspected by lord kitchener 
at avroult, on the st. omer roadthe first time it was ever paraded 
before its colonelinchiefwho in a few brief words recalled what 
it had already done in the war and hinted at what lay before it. lord 
cavan commanding the guards division, in wishing the men godspeed 
on the eve of the greatest battle in the worlds history, reminded 
them that the fate of future generations hung on the issue and that 
great things were expected of the guards division. they knew it well 
enough. 

by a piece of illluck, that might have been taken as an omen, the 
day before they moved from thiembronne to the front, a bombing 
accident at practice caused the death of lancesergeant r. matthews 
and three men, which few casualties, on the eve of tens of thousands 
to come, were due subjects of a court of inquiry and a full report 
to headquarters. then they marched by capellesurlys to nedon in 
mist and gathering rain as the autumn weather broke on the 24th, 
and heard the roar of what seemed continuous bombardment from vimy 
to la basse. but it was at dawn on the 25th september that the 
serious work of the heavy guns began, while the division crawled in 
pouring rain along congested roads from nedon to nuxlesmines. all 
they could see of the battlefront was veiled in clouds of gas and 
the screens of covering smoke through which our attacks had been 
launched after two hours of preliminary bombardment. our troops 
there found, as chance and accident decreed, either broken wire and 
halfobliterated trenches easy to overpass for a few hundred yards 
till they came to the uncut stuff before which the men perished as 
their likes had done on like fields. so it happened that day to the 
6th brigade of the first division north of la basse, and the 19th 
brigade south of it to the 28th brigade of the ninth division by 
the hohenzollern redoubt and pit 8. these all met wire uncut before 
trenches untouched, and were slaughtered. the 26th brigade of the 
ninth division broke through at a heavy cost as far as pit 8, and, 
for the moment, as far as the edge of the village of haisnes. the 
seventh division, working between the ninth division and the road 
from vermelles to hulluch, had better fortune. they penetrated as far 
as the edge of hulluch village, but were driven back, ere the days 
end, to the quarries a thousand yards in the rear. one brigade, the 
1st of the first division of the fourth army on their right, had 
also penetrated as far as the outskirts of hulluch. its 2nd brigade 
was hung up in barbed wire near lone tree to the southward, which 
check again exposed the left flank of the next fifteenth highland 
division as that 44th, 45th, and 46th brigades made its way into 
loos, carried hill z0, the chalk pit, and pit 14. the fortyseventh 
division on the extreme right of the british line at its junction 
with the french tenth army had to be used mainly as a defensive flank 
to the operation, since the french attack, which should have timed 
with ours, did not develop till six hours after our troops had got 
away, and was then limited to souchez and the vimy ridge. 

at noon on the 25th september the position stood thus the first 
army corps held up between the bthunela basse canal and the 
hohenzollern redoubt the seventh division hard pressed among the 
quarries and houses by hulluch the ninth in little better case as 
regarded pit 8 and the redoubt itself the highland division pushed 
forward in the right centre holding on precariously in the shambles 
round loos and being already forced back for lack of supports. 

all along the line the attack had spent itself among uncut wire and 
unsubdued machinegun positions. there were no more troops to follow 
at once on the heels of the first, nor was there time to dig in 
before the counterattacks were delivered by the germans, to whom 
every minute of delay meant the certainty of more available reserves 
fresh from the rail. a little after noon their pressure began to 
take effect, and ground won during the first rush of the advance was 
blasted out of our possession by gunfire, bombing, and floods of 
enemy troops arriving throughout the night. 

both sides were now bringing up reserves but ours seem to have 
arrived somewhat more slowly than the germans. 

the guards division had come up on foot as quickly as the traffic on 
the roads allowed, and by the morning of the 26th the 1st brigade 
2nd grenadiers, 2nd and 3rd coldstream, and 1st irish were marched 
to saillylabourse. the weather had improved, though the ground was 
heavy enough. loos still remained to us, hulluch was untaken. the 
enemy were well established on hill z0 and had driven us out of pit 
14 and the chalk pit quarry on the lensla basse road which had 
been won on the previous day. it was this sector of the line to which 
the 2nd and 3rd brigades of the guards division were directed. the 
local reserves 21st and 24th divisions had been used up, and as the 
brigade took over the ground were retiring directly through them. the 
1st guards brigade was employed in the work of holding the ground to 
the left, or north, of the other two brigades. their own left lay 
next what remained of the seventh division after the furious wastage 
of the past two days. 

on the afternoon of the 26th september the 2nd and 3rd coldstream, 
with the 2nd grenadiers in support, occupied some trenches in a 
waste of cutup ground east of a line of captured german trenches 
opposite hulluch. the 1st irish guards lay in trenches close to the 
wrecked watertower of the village of vermelles, while the confused 
and irregular attacks and counterattacks broke out along the line, 
slackened and were renewed again beneath the vault of the overhead 
clamour built by the passage of countless shells. 

the field of battle presented an extraordinary effect of dispersion 
and detachment. gas, smoke, and the continuous splash and sparkle of 
bombs marked where the lines were in actual touch, but behind and 
outside this inferno stretched a desolation of emptiness, peopled 
with single figures walking about all over the place, as one 
observer wrote, with dead and wounded on the ground, and casualties 
being slowly conveyed to dressingstationsevery one apparently 
unconcerned beneath shellfire, which in oldtime battles would have 
been reckoned heavy, but which here, by comparison, was peace. 

a premature burst of one of our own shells wounded four men of the 
battalions machinegun group as it was moving along the hulluch 
road, but there were no other casualties reported, and on sunday 
2zth, while the village of vermelles was being heavily shelled, no. 
2 and half of no. 3 company were sent forward to fetch off what 
wounded lay immediately in front of them on the battlefield. there 
was need. throughout that long sunday of clearing up at a slow 
pace under scattered fire, the casualties were but eleven in all2nd 
lieutenant graylingmajor, slightly wounded, one man killed and nine 
wounded. three thousand yards to the left their 2nd battalion, which, 
with the 2nd and 3rd guards brigades, had been set to recapture pit 
14 and chalkpit wood, lost that evening eight officers and over 
three hundred men killed and wounded. officerlosses had been very 
heavy, and orders were issued, none too soon, to keep a reserve 
of them, specially in the junior ranks. lieutenants yerburgh and 
rankin, with 2nd lieutenants law, langrishe, and walker, were thus 
sent back to the firstline transport to be saved for contingencies. 
2nd lieutenant christie and twenty men from the base joined on the 
same day. the battalion lay at that time behind the remnants of 
the 20th brigade of the seventh division, whose brigadier, colonel 
the hon. j. trefusis, had been their old c.o. his brigade, which 
had suffered between two and three thousand casualties, was in no 
shape for further fighting, but was hanging on in expectation of 
relief, if possible, from the mixed duties of trying to establish 
a line and sending out parties to assist in repelling the nearest 
counterattack. fighting continued everywhere, especially on the left 
of the line, and heavy rain added to the general misery. 

by the 28th september we might have gained on an average three 
thousand yards on a front of between six and seven thousand, but 
there was no certainty that we could hold it, and the front was 
alive with reportssome true, others falsethat the enemy had 
captured a line of trench here, broken through there, or was massing 
in force elsewhere. as a matter of fact, the worst of the german 
attacks had spent themselves, and both sides were, through their own 
difficulties, beginning to break off their main engagements for the 
bitter localised fightings that go to the making of a new front. 

in rain, chalky slime, and deep discomfort, after utter exhaustion, 
the broken battalions were comparing notes of news and imperturbably 
renewing their social life. brigadiergeneral trefusis slips, or 
wades, through rain and mud to lunch with his old battalion a few 
hundred yards away, and one learns indirectly what cheer and comfort 
his presence brings. then he goes on with the remnants of his 
shattered brigade, to take over fresh work on a quieter part of the 
line and en route to get his hair cut. 

the battalion, after sept. 29 another days soaking in vermelles 
trenches, relieved the 3rd brigade, first division, in frontline 
trenches just west of hulluch. 

the ground by le rutoire farm and bois carr between the battered 
german trenches was a sea of shell craters and wreckage, scorched 
with fires of every sort which had swept away all landmarks. lone 
tree, a general rendezvous and clearingstation for that sector of 
the line and a registered mark for enemy guns, was the spot where 
their guides met them in the rainy, windy darkness. the relief took 
four hours and cost drillsergeant corry, another n.c.o., and a 
private wounded. all four company commanders went ahead some hours 
before to acquaint themselves with the impassable trenches, the 
battalions being brought on, in artillery formation, by the adjutant. 

on the 30th september, the english losses having brought our efforts 
to a standstill, the troops of the ninth french army corps began 
to take over the trenches defending loos and running out of the 
ruins of that town to hill z0. foch and duntal in their fighting 
since the 2zth had driven, at a price, the germans out of souchez, 
and some deceptive progress had been made by the tenth french army 
corps up the vimy heights to the right of the english line. in all, 
our armies had manufactured a salient, some five miles wide across 
the bow of it, running from cuinchy post, the hohenzollern redoubt, 
the hulluch quarries, the edge of hill z0, the south of loos, and 
thence doubling back to grenay. on the other hand, the enemy had 
underdriven a section south of this at the junction of the allied 
forces running through lens, livin, angres by givenchyengohelle 
over the vimy heights to the scarpe below arras. there may, even on 
the 30th, have remained some hope on our part of breaking through 
into the plain of the scheldt, with its chance of open warfare to 
follow. the enemy, however, had no intention of allowing us any 
freedom of movement which localised attacks on his part could limit 
and hold till such time as his reserves might get in a counterattack 
strong enough to regain all the few poor hundreds of yards which we 
had shelled, bombed, and bayoneted out of his front. the fighting was 
specially severe that day among the rabbitwarrens of trenches by the 
hohenzollern redoubt. sections of trenches were lost and won back or 
wiped out by gunfire all along a front where, for one instance of 
recorded heroism among the confusion of bombs and barricades, there 
were hundreds unrecorded as the spouting earth closed over and hid 
all afterknowledge of the very site of the agony. 

a section of trench held by the scots fusiliers on the immediate left 
of the irish guards was attacked and a hundred yards or so of it were 
captured, but the battalion was not called upon to lend a hand. it 
lay under heavy shell and sniping fire in the wet, till it was time 
to exchange the comparative security of a wet open drain for the 
unsheltered horrors of a relief which, beginning in the dusk at six, 
was not completed till close on two in the morning. the last company 
reached their miserable billets at mazingarbe, some three miles away 
across a wellsearched backarea at 6 a. m. one n.c.o. was killed and 
ten n.c.o.s and men were wounded. 

they spent the next three days in the battered suburbs of mazingarbe 
while the twelfth division took over the guards line and the ninth 
french army corps relieved the british troops who were holding the 
south face of the cuinchyhulluchgrenay salient. the 1st battalion 
itself was now drawn upon to meet the demands of the 2nd battalion 
for officers to make good losses in their action of the 2zth. five 
officers, at least, were badly needed, but no more than four could 
be sparedcaptain j. s. n. fitzgerald, as adjutant, lieutenant r. 
rankin, lieutenant h. montgomery, who had only arrived with a draft 
on the 1st october, and 2nd lieutenant langrishe. officers were a 
scarce commodity for, though there was a momentary lull, there had 
been heavy bomb and trench work by the twentyeighth division all 
round the disputed hohenzollern redoubt which was falling piece by 
piece into the hands of the enemy, and counterattacks were expected 
all along the uncertain line. 


the hohenzollern trenches 

on october 3 the guards division relieved the twentyeighth round 
the hohenzollern and the hulluch quarries. the 3rd brigade of the 
division was assigned as much of the works round the hohenzollern as 
yet remained to us the 1st brigade lay on their right linking on to 
the first division which had relieved the twelfth on the right of the 
guards division. the 2nd guards brigade was in reserve at vermelles. 
the 1st battalion acted as reserve to its own, the 1st, brigade, and 
moving from mazingarbe on the afternoon of the 3rd bivouacked in 
misery to the west of the railway line just outside vermelles. the 
2nd grenadiers, in trenches which had formed part of the old british 
front line northeast of the chapel of notre dame de consolation, 
supported the 2nd and 3rd coldstream who held the firingline in a 
mass of unsurveyed and unknown german trenches running from st. elie 
avenue, a notorious and most dismal communicationtrench, northwards 
towards the hohenzollern redoubt, one face of which generously 
enfiladed our line at all times. the whole was a wilderness of muck 
and death, reached through three thousand yards of foul gutters, 
impeded by loops and knots of old telephone cables, whose sides 
bulged in the wet, and where, with the best care in the world, 
reliefs could go piteously astray and isolated parties find 
themselves plodding, blind and helpless, into the enemys arms. 

opinions naturally differ as to which was the least attractive period 
of the war for the battalion, but there was a general feeling that, 
setting aside the cruel wet of the salient and the complicated barren 
miseries of the somme, the times after loos round the hohenzollern 
redoubt and in the laventie sector were the worst. men and officers 
had counted on getting forward to open country at last, and the 
return to redoubled trenchwork and its fatigues was no comfort to 
them. but the work had to be done, and the notice in the diary that 
they were responsible for improving and cleaning up the trenches 
as far as the support battalionswhich meant as far as they could 
get forwardimplied unbroken labour in the chalky ground, varied by 
carrying up supplies, bombs, and smallarm ammunition to the front 
line. there were five bombing posts in their sector of the front with 
as many sapheads, all to be guarded. most of the trenches needed 
deepening, and any work in the open was at the risk of a continuous 
stream of bullets from the hohenzollerns machineguns. high 
explosives and a few gasshells by day, aerial torpedoes by night, 
and sniping all round the clock, made the accompaniment to their life 
for the nine days that they held the line. 

here is the bare record. on the 6th october, two men killed and 
three wounded, while strengthening parapets. on the zth, lieutenant 
heard and three men with him wounded, while superintending work in 
the open within range of the spiteful hohenzollern. on the 8th, six 
hours unbroken bombardment, culminating, so far as the battalion 
knew, in an attack on the 2nd coldstream whom they were supporting 
and the 3rd grenadiers on their left. the grenadiers, most of their 
bombers killed, borrowed no. 1 companys bombers, who did good 
work, while no. 1 company itself formed a flank to defend the left 
of the brigade in case the germans broke through, as for a time 
seemed possible. both grenadiers and coldstream ran out of bombs and 
ammunition which the battalion sent up throughout the evening until 
it was reported that all was normal again and that the germans 
had everywhere been repulsed with heavy loss. the battalion then 
carried up rations to the coldstream and spent the rest of the night 
repairing blownin ammunition trenches. they had had no time to 
speculate or ask questions, and not till long afterwards did they 
realise that the blast of a great battle had passed over them that 
the germans had counterattacked with picked battalions all along 
the line of the cuinchyhulluchgrenay salient and that their dead 
lay in thousands on the cutup ground from souchez to hohenzollern. 
in modern trenchwarfare any attack extending beyond the range of a 
combatants vision, which runs from fifty yards to a quarter of a 
mile, according to the ground and his own personal distractions, may, 
for aught he can tell, be either an engagement of the first class or 
some local brawl for the details of which he can search next weeks 
home papers in vain. 

the battalions got through the day with only six men killed, eleven 
wounded, and one gassed, and on the 9th, when they were busiest in 
the work of repairing wrecked trenches, they were informed that 
certain recesses which they had been cutting out in the trenches for 
the reception of gascylinders would not be required and that they 
were to fill them in again. as a veteran of four years experience 
put it, apropos of this and some other matters men take more 
notice, yell understand, of one extra fatigue, than any three 
fights. 

a few aerial torpedoes which, whether they kill or not, make 
unlimited mess, fell during the night, and on the morning of the 10th 
october lieutenant m. v. gorelangtonone of the battalions best 
and most efficient officerswas shot through the head and killed 
by a german sniper while looking for a position for a loophole in 
the parapet. he was buried six hours later in the british cemetery 
at vermelles, and the command of his company devolved on lieutenant 
yerburgh. our own artillery spent the day in breaking german wire 
in front of the hulluch quarries at long range and a little more 
than a hundred yards ahead of our trenches. several of our shells 
dropped short, to the discomfort of the irish, but the wire was 
satisfactorily cut, and two companies kept up bursts of rapid fire 
during the night to stay the enemy from repairing it. only 5 men were 
killed and 5 wounded from all causes this day. 

on the 11th our guns resumed wirecutting and, besides making it most 
unpleasant for our men in the front trenches, put one of our own 
machineguns out of action, but luckily with no loss of life. 

the tragedy of the day came later when, just after lunch, a shell 
landed in the doorway of headquarters dugout, breaking both of 
colonel maddens legs, and mortally wounding the rev. father john 
gwynne, the battalions r.c. chaplain colonel madden died in 
england a few weeks later. the adjutant, lord desmond fitzgerald, 
was slightly wounded also. the other two occupants of the dugout, 
captain bailie, who had gone through almost precisely the same 
experience in the same spot not three days before, and the medical 
officer, were untouched. it was difficult to get two wounded men down 
the trenches to the headquarters of the supporting battalion, where 
they had to be left till dark. and then they were carried back in the 
openor overland as the phrase was. father gwynne died next day 
in hospital at bthune, and the battalion lost in him not merely 
the chaplain, but a man unusually beloved. he had been with them 
since november of the previous year. he feared nothing, despised no 
one, betrayed no confidence nor used it to his own advantage upheld 
authority, softened asperities, and cheered and comforted every man 
within his reach. if there were any blemish in a character so utterly 
selfless, it was no more than a tendency, shared by the servants of 
his calling, to attach more importance to the administration of the 
last rites of his church to a wounded man than to the immediate 
appearance of the medical officer, and to forget that there are times 
when supreme unction can be a depressant. per contra, absolution 
at the moment of going over the top, if given with vigour and good 
cheer, as he gave it, is a powerful tonic. at all times the priests 
influence in checking crime in a regiment is very large indeed, 
and with such priests as the irish guards had the good fortune to 
possess, almost unbounded. 

colonel madden was succeeded by captain lord desmond fitzgerald as 
commanding officer, and the rest of the day was spent in suffering 
a bombardment of aerial torpedoes, very difficult to locate and not 
put down by our heavy guns till after dark. besides the 3 wounded 
officers that day 3 men were wounded and, 3 killed. 

on the morning of the 13th, after heavy shelling, a bomb attack on 
the 2nd grenadiers developed in the trenches to the right, when the 
battalion brought up and detonated several boxes for their comrades. 
their work further included putting up 120 scalingladders for an 
attack by the 35th brigade. 

next day they were relieved by the zth norfolks, 35th brigade of the 
north midland division of territorials, and went to rest at verquin, 
five or six miles behind the line. it took them nearly seven hours 
to clear the trenches colonel madden, on account of his wounds, 
being carried out on a sitting litter lord desmond fitzgerald, who, 
as adjutant, had been wounded when father gwynne had been killed, 
overdue for hospital with a piece of shrapnel in his foot, and all 
ranks utterly done after their nine days turn of duty. they laid 
them down as tired animals lie, while behind them the whole north 
front of the cuinchyhulluch salient broke into set battle once again. 

a series of holding attacks were made all along the line almost from 
ypres to la basse to keep the enemy from reinforcing against the 
real one on the hohenzollern redoubt, fosse 8, the hulluch quarries 
and the heart of the loos position generally. it was preceded 
by bombardments that in some cases cut wire and in some did not, 
accompanied by gas and smoke, which affected both sides equally it 
was carried through by men in smokehelmets, halfblinding them among 
blinding accompaniments of fumes and flying earth, through trenches 
to which there was no clue, over the wrecks of streets of miners 
cottages, cellars and underground machinegun nests, and round the 
concreted flanks of unsuspected artillery emplacements. among these 
obstacles, too, it died out with the dead battalions of regulars and 
territorials caught, as the chances of war smote them, either in bulk 
across open ground or in detail among bombs and machinegun posts. 

there was here, as many times before, and very many times after, 
heroism beyond belief, and every form of bravery that the spirit 
of man can make good. the net result of all, between the 2zth of 
september and the 15th of october, when the last groundswell of the 
long fight smoothed itself out over the unburied dead, was a loss to 
us of 50,000 men and 2000 officers, and a gain of a salient seven 
thousand yards long and three thousand two hundred yards deep. for 
practical purposes, a good deal of this depth ranked as no mans 
land from that date till the final breakup of the german hosts in 
1918. the public were informed that the valour of the new territorial 
divisions had justified their training, which seemed expensive and 
that our armies, whatever else they lacked at that timeand it was 
not a littlehad gained in confidence which seemed superfluous. 


after loos 

but the battalion lay at verquin, cleaning up after its ten days 
filth, and there was mass on the morning of the 14th, when father s. 
knapp came over from the 2nd battalion and spoke to the men on the 
subject of father gwynnes death, for now that the two battalions 
were nextdoor neighbours, father knapp served both. no written 
record remains of the priests speech, but those who survive that 
heard it say it moved all mens hearts. mass always preceded the 
days work in billets, but even on the first morning on their return 
from the trenches the men would make shift somehow to clean their 
hands and faces, and if possible to shave, before attending it, no 
matter what the hour. 

then on the 14th october they moved from verquin to unpleasing 
saillylabourse, four miles or so behind the line, for another days 
rest in billets, and so oct. 1z to what was left of vermelles, a 
couple of miles from the front, where the men had to make the wrecked 
houses habitable till oct. 19 they took over from the welsh guards 
some reservetrenches on the old ground in front of clerks keep, a 
quarter of a mile west of the vermelles railway line. 

the 20th october was the day when the 2nd battalion were engaged in 
a bombing attack on the hohenzollern, from which they won no small 
honour, as will be told in their story. the 1st battalion lay at 
vermelles, unshelled for the moment, and had leisure to make light 
overhead cover for the men against the rain. the division was in 
line again, and the battalions first work was to improve a new 
line of trenches which, besides the defect of being much too close 
to the hohenzollern, lacked dugouts. in lord desmond fitzgeralds 
absence, major the hon. h. r. alexander from the 2nd battalion took 
command of the battalion, and they relieved the 2nd coldstream on the 
21st and resumed the stale routinedigging saps under fire, which 
necessitated shovelling the earth into sandbags, and emptying it out 
by night dodging snipers and trenchmortars, and hoping that our 
own shells, which were battering round the hohenzollern, would not 
fall too short fixing wire and fuses till the moon grew and they 
had to wait for the dawnmists to cloak their work discovering and 
reconnoitring old german communicationtrenches that ran to evernew 
german snipingposts and had to be blocked with wire tangles and 
losing in three days, by minenwerfers, sniping, the fall of dugouts 
and premature bursts of our own shells, z men killed and 18 wounded. 
the two companies 1 and 2 went back to vermelles, while 3 and 4 
took over the supporttrenches from the 3rd coldstream, reversing the 
process on the 24th october. 

when letters hint at drill in any connection, it is a sure sign 
that a battalion is on the eve of relief. for example, on the 24th, 
2nd lieutenant levy arrived with a draft of fiftyeight men, a 
sergeant, and two corporals, who were divided among the companies. 
the diary observes that they were a fair lot of men but did not 
look too well drilled. accordingly, after a couple of days mild 
shelling round and near vermelles church and shrine, we find the 
battalion relieved by the norfolks oct. 26. all four companies 
worked their way cautiously out of the firezoneit is at the moment 
of relief that casualties are most feltpicked up their headquarters 
and transport, and marched for half of a whole day in the open to 
billets at pleasant, wooded lapugnoy, where they found clean straw 
to lie down on and were promised blankets. after the usual cleanup 
and payment of the men, they were ordered off to chocques to take 
part in the kings review of the guards division at haute rize on 
the afternoon of the 28th, but, owing to the accident to his majesty 
caused by the horse falling with him, the parade was cancelled. 

steady drill filled the next ten days. lieutenant the hon. b. 
obrien started to train fresh bombingsquads with the mills bomb, 
which was then being issued in such quantities that as many as twenty 
whole boxes could be spared for instruction. up till then, bombs had 
been varied in type and various in action. as had been pointed out, 
the irish took kindly to this game and produced many notable experts. 
but the perfect bomber is not always docile out of the line. among 
the giants of 15 was a private against whom order had gone forth 
that on no account was he to be paid on paydays, for the reason that 
once in funds he would retire into france at large for a day and a 
night and a morrow, and return a happy, hiccuping but indispensable 
criminal. at last, after a long stretch of enforced virtue, he 
managed, by chicane or his own amazing personality, to seduce five 
francs from his platoon sergeant and forthwith disappeared. on his 
return, richly disguised, he sought out his benefactor with a gift 
under his arm. the rest is in his sergeants own words no, i 
says, go away and sleep it off, i says, pushin it away, for 
twas a rum jar he was temptin me with. tis for you, sergeant, 
he says. youre the only man that has thrusted me with a centime 
since summer. thrust him there was no sergeant of ours had not 
been remindin me of those same five francs all the time hed been 
awaylet alone what id got at company orders. so i loosed myself 
upon him, an i described him to himself the way hed have shame at 
it, but shame was not in him. yes, sergeant, he says to me, full 
i am, and this is full too, he says, pattin the rum jar and it 
was, an i know where theres plenty more, he says, and its all 
for you an your great thrustfulness to me about them five francs. 
what could i do? hed made me a laughingstock to the battalion. an 
awful man hed done it all on those five unlucky francs yes, 
hed lead a bombin party or a drinkin partyhis own or any other 
battalions and he was worth a platoon an a half when there was 
anything doing, and i thrust in god hes alive yethim and his five 
francs but an awful man 

drunkenness was confined, for the most part, to a known few 
characters, regular and almost privileged in their irregularities. 
the influence of the priest and the work of the company officers 
went hand in hand here. here is a tribute paid by a brother officer 
to captain gorelangton, killed on the 10th october, which explains 
the secret. the men liked him for his pluck and the plain way in 
which he dealt with them, always doing his best for the worst, most 
idle, and stupidest men in our company.... one cant really believe 
hes gone. i always expect to see him swinging round a traverse. the 
battalion did not forget him, and while at lapugnoy, sent a party to 
vermelles to attend to his grave there. 

on the 31st october lieut.colonel r. c. mccalmont arrived from 
commanding a battalion of the new ulster army division and took over 
the command from major alexander who reverted to the 2nd battalion, 
from which he had been borrowed. 


laventie 

on the 10th of the month the guards division were for duty again 
on the laventie sector, which at every time of the year had a 
bad reputation for wet. the outcome of loos had ended hope of a 
breakthrough, and a few thousand yards won there against a few 
thousand lost out ypres way represented the balance of the account 
since november 1914. therefore, once again, the line had to be held 
till more men, munitions and materials could be trained, manufactured 
and accumulated, while the price of making war on the spur of the 
moment was paid, day in and day out, with the bodies of young men 
subject to every form of death among the slits in the dirt along 
which they moved. it bored them extremely, but otherwise did not 
much affect their morale. they built some sort of decent life out of 
the monotonous hours they came to know the very best and the very 
worst in themselves and in their comrades upon whom their lives and 
wellbeing depended and they formed friendships that lasted, as 
fate willed, for months or even years. they lied persistently and 
with intent in their home letters concerning their discomforts and 
exposure, and lent themselves to the impression, cultivated by some 
sedulous newspapers, that the trenches were electricallylighted 
abodes of comfort and jollity, varied with concerts and sports. it 
was all part of the trial which the national genius calls the game. 

the battalion lieut.colonel r. c. mccalmont commanding was at 
pacaut, due north of bthune, on the 11th, at merville on the 14th, 
training young soldiers how to use smokehelmetsfor gas was 
a thing to be expected anywhere nowand enjoying every variety 
of weather, from sodden wet to sharp frost. the effects of the 
gashelmet on the young soldiers were quaintly described as very 
useful on them. twas like throwin a cloth over a parrotcage. it 
stopped all their chat. 

on the 20th november they took over reservebillets from the 1st 
scots guards near bout deville, and the next day, after inspection 
of both battalions by general feilding, commanding the division, 
and the late mr. john redmond, m.p., went into trenches with the 
happy foreknowledge that they were likely to stay there till the 
2nd of january and would be lucky if they got a few days out at 
christmas. it was a stretch of unmitigated beastliness in the low 
ditchriddled ground behind neuve chapelle and the aubers ridge, 
on the interminable la basseestaires road, with no available 
communicationtrenches, in many places impassable from wet, all 
needing sandbags and all, in a very neglected state, except for the 
work done by the 2nd guards brigade the week before the battalion 
moved in. it is nowhere on record that the guards division, or 
for that matter, any other, was ever contented with trenches that 
it took over. the enemy, however, were quiet, being at least as 
uncomfortable as our people. even when our fieldguns blew large 
gaps in their parapets a hundred yards away there was very little 
retaliation, and our casualties on reliefthe men lay in scattered 
billets at riez bailleul three miles or so up the roadwere 
relatively few. 

in one whole week not more than four or five men were killed and 
fifteen or sixteen wounded, two of them by our own shrapnel bursting 
short while our guns experimented on blockhouses and steel cupolas, 
as these revealed themselves. even when the prince of wales visited 
the line at the majorgenerals inspection of it, and left by the 
only possible road, sign post lane, in broad daylight in the open, 
within a furlong of the enemy, casualties did not occur there 
is no mention, either, of any of the aeroplanevisitations which 
sometimes followed his appearances. as a personal friend of one of 
the officers, he found reason to visit along that sector more often 
than is officially recorded. 

at the beginning of the month the 1st guards brigade was relieved 
by the 3rd of its division, and the battalion handed its line 
over to the 4th grenadiers, not without some housewifely pride at 
improvements it had effected. but, since pride ever precedes a fall, 
the sharp frost of the past week dissolved in heavy rain, and the 
neat newmade breastworks with their aligned sandbags collapsed. if 
the 4th grenadiers keep veracious diaries, it is probable that that 
night of thaw and delayed reliefs is strongly recorded in them. 

la gorgue, under estaires, upon the sluggish lys in sodden wet 
weather december 38 gave them a breathing space for a general 
washup and those steady drills necessary to mankind. the new 
stretch that they took over from their own 2nd battalion was about 
two miles north of their previous one and southeast of laventie, 
running parallel to the rue tilleloy, that endless road, flanked, 
like all others hereabouts, with farmhouses, which joins armentires 
to neuve chapelle. the ground was, of course, sop, the parapets were 
perforable breastworks, but reliefs could arrive unobserved within 
five hundred yards of the front, and the enemys line lay in most 
places nearly a quarter of a mile from ours. more important still, 
there was reasonable accommodation for battalion headquarters in a 
farmhouse one of the many red houses of the war which, by some 
accident, had been untouched so far, though it stood less than a mile 
from the front line. where headquarters are comfortable, headquarters 
are happy, and by so much the more placable. only very young soldiers 
grudge them protection and warmth. 

for a few days it was a peaceful stretch of the great line that 
buttressed on switzerland and the sea. christmas was coming, and, 
even had the weather allowed it, neither side was looking too 
earnestly for trouble. 

a company of welsh fusiliers with their c.o. and adjutant came up for 
eight days instruction, and were distributed through the battalion. 
the system in the front line at that moment was one of gangs of 
three, a digger, an armed man, and a bomber, relieving each other by 
shifts and to each of these trios one welshman was allotted. 

the welsh were small, keen and inquisitive. the large irish praised 
their saints aloud for sending them new boys to talk to through the 
long watches. it is related of one welshman that, among a thousand 
questions, he demanded if his tutor had ever gone over the top. the 
irishman admitted that he had. and how often does one go over? 
the welshman continued. ill show you. come with me, replied 
the other celt, and, moving to a gap in the parapet, lifted the 
welshman in his arms that he might the better see what remained, 
hung up in german wire, of a private of some ancient fightwithered 
wreckage, perhaps, of neuve chapelle. he went over wanst, said 
the irishman. the workingparty resumed their labours and, men say, 
that that new boy put no more questions for the full of the half an 
houran thats as long as a week to a welshman. 

all four companies were held in the first line except for three 
postspicantin, dead end, and hougoumonta few hundred yards behind 
that were manned with a platoon apiece, but on the 12th december 
rumours of a mine made it wise to evacuate a part of the right 
flank till one of our 9.2s should have searched for the suspected 
mineshaft. its investigations roused the enemy to mild retaliation, 
which ended next day in one of our men being wounded by our own 9.2, 
and three by the enemys shrapnelthe first casualties in four days. 

the wet kept the peace along the line, but it did not altogether damp 
the energies of our patrols. for a reason, not explained officially, 
lieutenant s. e. f. christy was moved to go out with a patrol 
and to hurl into the german lines a printed message was it the 
earliest workings of propaganda? demanding that the germans should 
surrender. there is no indication whether the summons was to the 
german army at large or merely to as many of them as lay before the 
battalion but, the invitation being disregarded, lieutenants christy 
and law made themselves offensive in patrolwork to the best of their 
means. on one excursion the latter officer discovered december 15 
a waterlogged concretebuilt loophole dugout occupied by germans. 
being a hardened souvenirhunter, he is reported to have removed the 
official german nameboard of the establishment ere he went back for 
reinforcements with a view of capturing it complete. on his return 
he found it abandoned. the water had driven the enemy to a drier 
post, and the cuttingout expedition had to be postponed. too long 
in the line without incident wears on every ones temper, but luck 
was against them and an attempt on the 20th december by a selected 
party under some r.e.s and lieutenants law and christy was ruined 
by the moonlight and the fact that the enemy had returned to their 
concrete hutch and were more than on the alert. by the light of later 
knowledge the battalion was inclined to believe that the dugout had 
been left as bait and that there were too many spies in our lines 
before laventie. 

on the 21st december the battalion came out for christmas and 
billeted at laventie, as their next turn would be in the old sector 
that they had handed over to the 4th grenadiers three weeks ago. the 
same battalion relieved them on this day, and, as before, were an 
hour late in turning upa thing inexcusable except on ones own part. 

their adjutants preoccupations with officers sick and wounded 
n.c.o.s promoted to commissions in line battalions, and the catching 
and training of their substitutes and with all the housekeeping 
work of a battalion in the field, had not prevented him from making 
strict and accurate inquiries at headquarters as to what exactly is 
being sent out for christmas day. is it plumpudding only or sausages 
alone? last year we had both, but i should like to know for certain. 

all things considered and there was no shelling, christmas dinner 
at la gorgue 1915 was a success, and the c.o. and other officers 
went round the dinners as at home in merciful ignorance that those 
of them who survived would attend three more such festivals. 

majorgeneral lord cavan, commanding the guards division, who had 
been appointed to command the newly formed fourteenth corps,z 
addressed the officers after dinner and halfpromised them the 
christmas present they most desired. he spoke well of the battalion, 
as one who had seen and shared their work had right to do, saying 
that there might be as good, but there were none better, and added 
that there was just a hope that the guards division might eventually 
go to his corps. they cheered. 

the quiet that fell about christmastide held till the birth of the 
new year, which the inscrutable hun mind celebrated punctually on 
the hour german time with twenty minutes heavy machinegun and 
riflefire in the darkness. one killed and one wounded were all their 
casualties. 

here is the roll of the officers and staff of the battalion as the 
year ended in mud, among rotten parapets and waterlogged trenches, 
with nothing to show for all that had gone before save time gained 
and ground held to allow of preparation for the real struggle, on 
the edge of which these thousand soldiers and all their world stood 
ignorant but unshaken 


headquarters 

  lieut.colonel r. c. a. mccalmont    commanding officer. 
  major lord desmond fitzgerald        adjutant. 
  lieut. t. e. g. nugent               a.adjutant. 
  hon. lieut. h. hickie                quartermaster. 
  capt. p. h. antrobus                 transport. 
  lieut. c. pease                      brigade company. 
  lieut. l. c. whitefoord                      
  lieut. j. graylingmajor             depot. 
  capt. rev. a. h. a. knapp, o.p.      chaplain. 
  capt. p. r. woodhouse, r.a.m.c.      medical officer. 
  no. 108 sgt. major kirk              sgt. major. 
  no. 1z6 q.m.s. j. m. payne           q.m.s. 
  no. 918 drillsgt. t. cahill         senior drill sgt. 
  no. 2666 drillsgt. g. weeks         junior drill sgt. 
  no. 1134 o.r.cr. sgt. p. matthews    orderlyroom sgt. at base. 
  no. 3933 sgt. dr. w. cherry          sgt. drummer. 
  no. 1119 sgt. r. nugent              a.pioneer sgt. 
  no. 83z armr. q.m.s. s. bradley      armr. q.m.s. 
  no. 38z4 sgt. m. greaney             transport sgt. 
  no. 4166 sgt. j. fawcett             signalling sgt. 
  no. 2900 sgt. p. j. curtis           orderlyroom clerk. 


no. 1 company. 

  capt. r. g. c. yerburgh. 
  lieut. d. j. b. fitzgerald. 
  2562 c.s.m. p. a. carroll. 
  3z26 c.q.m.s. p. mgoldrick. 
  3303 a.c.q.m.s. j. glynn. 


no. 2 company. 

  capt. v. c. j. blake. 
  lieut. c. e. r. hanbury. 
  3949 c.s.m. d. voyles. 
  999 c.q.m.s. h. payne. 


no. 3 company. 

  capt. t. m. d. bailie. 
  capt. a. f. l. gordon. 
  lieut. s. e. f. christy. 
  lieut. k. e. dormer. 
  2112 c.s.m. h. mveigh. 
  39z2 c.q.m.s. r. grady. 
  2922 a.c.s.m. j. donolly. 


no. 4 company. 

  capt. p. s. longinnes. 
  lieut. hon. h. b. obrien bombing officer. 
  lieut. r. j. p. rodakowski. 
  2nd lieut. m. b. levy. 
  3632 c.s.m. m. moran. 
  2122 c.q.m.s. t. murphy. 
  z98 a.c.q.m.s. j. scanlon. 




1916 

the salient to the somme 


brigadiergeneral g. feilding, d.s.o., as we know, succeeded lord 
cavan in the command of the guards division, and the enemy woke up 
to a little more regular shelling and sniping for a few days till 
january 4 the 1st guards brigade was unexpectedly relieved by a 
fresh brigade the 114th, and the battalion moved to billets in st. 
floris which, as usual, were in a very filthy condition. there they 
stayed, under strong training at bombing and lewis gunnery, till 
the 12th. thence to merville till the 23rd, when lieutenant hon. h. 
b. obrien, a specialist in these matters, as may have been noticed 
before, was appointed brigade bombing officer. the bomb was to be the 
dominant factor of the days work for the next year or so, and the 
number of students made the country round billets unwholesome and 
varied. there is a true tale of a bombing school on a foggy morning 
who, hurling with zeal over a bank into the mist, found themselves 
presently being cursed from a safe distance by a repairing party 
who had been sent out to discover why one whole system of biggun 
telephonewires was dumb. they complained that the school had cut it 
into vermicelli. 

the instruction bore fruit for, so soon as they were back in the 
trenches at ebenezer farm, which they had quitted on the 4th, bombing 
seems to have been forced wherever practicable. a weak, or it might 
be more accurate to say, a sore point had developed on the front in 
a crater thrown up by one of our own mines, which it was necessary 
to sap out to and protect by intermittent bombing. this brought 
retaliation and a few casualties nightly. a trenchmortar battery 
was imported to deal with the nuisance and, as might be expected, 
drew the enemys artillery. 

on the 28th january a single stray bullet in the dark found and 
killed captain v. c. j. blake, no. 2 company, while he was laying out 
some work in wire for his company, and a bombing attack round the 
minecrater ended in three other ranks killed and one wounded. 

on february 1 our mineshaft in the same locality flooded without 
warning and drowned a couple of men in a listeningpost. our pumps 
could make no impression on the water it was difficult to put up 
any headcover for the men in the forward sap, and the enemys wire 
was being strengthened nightly and needed clearing away. this was 
routinework undertaken by our artillery who blew gaps in it in three 
places, which the battalion covered with machinegun fire. it kept 
the enemy reasonably quiet, and h.r.h. prince albert, who was out on 
a tour from england, breakfasted with battalion headquarters the same 
morning february 5. once again the enemys information must have 
been inaccurate or delayed since there is no mention of any shelling 
or aeroplane work on headquarters. 

they came out of the line on the zth and billeted near merville. 
reckoned by their standards it had been an uneventful stretch of 
duty, and those officers who could be spared had gone on short leave 
for there was a rumour that leave would be stopped after the 20th of 
the month. the french and their english allies knew well that the 
great german attack on verdun was ripening it opened in the third 
week of february and the world had no doubt of the issues that 
depended upon that gate to the heart of france holding fast. the 
whole long line stiffened to take the weight of any sudden sideissue 
or main catastrophe that the chance of war might bring about. but a 
battalion among hundreds of battalions knows as little what its own 
movements mean as a single truck in a goods yard knows of the import 
and export trade of great britain. the young officers snatched their 
few hours leave at home, loyally told their people that all was 
going well, returnedto a most interesting lecture on the battle 
of neuve chapelle, delivered at la gorgue by a divisional staff 
officer, and to an inspection of the 1st guards brigade by lord 
kitchener on a vile wet day when they were all soaked to the skin 
february 10, and to the usual routine in very poor weather. 

lord desmond fitzgerald, being now second in command by seniority, 
resigned his adjutancy and was succeeded by lieutenant t. e. g. 
nugent no. 2, captain blakes, company was commanded by major the 
hon. a. c. s. chichester, fresh from home, and father s. knapp, 
their priest, who had been transferred to the 1st london irish, 
was followed by father j. lanefox from the same battalion. of the 
six fathers who served the two battalions, twofathers gwynne and 
s. knapp, d.s.o., m.c.were killed, onefather f. m. browne, 
m.c.wounded twice, and onefather f. s. browne, m.c.wounded once. 

on the face of it nothing could have been quieter and more domestic 
than their daily life round merville, and after a week of it they 
were moved february 16 north towards steenvoorde, in a hurricane 
of wind and rain, to the neighbourhood of poperinghe, on the 
yprespoperinghedunkirk road, and a camp of tents, mostly blown 
down, and huts connected, for which small ease they were grateful, 
by duckboards. this brought them into the second army area and into 
the fourteenth corps under lord cavan, precisely as that officer had 
hoped. he explained to them there was a small german offensive on 
the left of the line here, and that if it came to anything the 
brigade might be wanted. 

the small offensive had opened on the 13th with a furious 
bombardment of the extreme southern end of the ypres salient between 
the yprescomines canal and yprescomines railway, a little to the 
south of hill 60, followed by the springing of five mines under 
the british front line and an infantry attack, which ended in the 
capture by the enemy of four or five hundred yards of trench and 
the low ridge called the bluff, over which they ran. the affair 
bulked big in the newspaperpress of the day for a battalion, 
the 10th lancashire fusiliers, was literally buried by one of the 
mine explosions. the german gain was well held, but prevented from 
extending by a concentration of our artillery, and later on march 2 
the whole position was recaptured after desperate fighting and the 
line there came to rest. 

for the first time the battalion seems impressed by the hostile 
aircraft with which the salient was filled. poperinghe and hazebrouck 
were bombed almost as soon as they came in, and their camp was 
visited by four aeroplanes at high noon, after a snowfall, which 
showed up everything below. they had been attending a demonstration 
to prove the harmlessness of a flammenwerfer if only one lay flat 
on the ground and let the roaring blast hiss over. ribald men have 
explained, since, that these demonstrations were more demoralising 
than the actual machine in action, especially when, as occasionally 
happened, the nozzle of the flameshooter carried away and, in the 
attempts to recontrol the thing, the class, bombed from above and 
chased by fire below, broke and fled. 

but the whole salient was a deathtrap throughout. the great shells 
crossed each others path at every angle, back and forth, single 
or in flights. for no certain cause that our side could guess, 
fire would concentrate itself on some halfobliterated feature of 
the landscapea bank, the poor stumpage of a wood, a remnant of a 
village or the angle of a road, that went out in smoke, dust, and 
flying clods, as though devils were flinging it up with invisible 
spades. the concentrated clamours would die down and cease the 
single shells would resume their aimless falling over a line of 
fields, with the monotony of drips from a tap, till, again, it seemed 
as though one of them had found something worthy of attention and 
shouted back the news to its fellows who, crowding altogether in one 
spot, roared, overturned, and set alight for five or ten wild minutes 
or through a methodical halfhour. if the storm fell on bare ground, 
that was churned and torn afresh into smoking clods if upon men in 
trenches, on relief, or with the transport, no eye could judge what 
harm had been done for often where it had seemed as though nothing 
could live, dispersed units picked themselves up and reformed, almost 
untouched, after inconceivable escapes. elsewhere, a few spurts of 
stinking smoke in a corner might cover all that remained of a platoon 
or have ripped the heart out of a silent, waiting company. by night, 
fantastic traceries of crossing firelines ran along the shoulder of 
a ridge shrapnel, bursting high, jetted a trail of swift sparks, 
as it might be steel striking flint dropping flares outlined some 
tortured farmhouse among its willowstumps, or the intolerable glare 
of a big shell framed itself behind a naked doorway and coloured 
lights dyed the bellies of the low clouds till all sense of distance 
and direction was lost, and the bewildered troops stumbled and 
crawled from pav to pothole, treading upon the old dead. 

dawn brought dirty white desolation across yellow mud pitted with 
slatecoloured waterholes, and confused by senseless grey and 
black lines and curled tangles of mire. there was nothing to see, 
exceptalmost pearlcoloured under their muddyed helmetsthe 
tense, preoccupied faces of men moving with wide spaces between their 
platoons, to waterfloored cellars and shelters chillier even than 
the gravelike trenches they had left, always with the consciousness 
that they were watched by invisible eyes which presently would choose 
certain of them to be killed. those who came through it, say that the 
sense of this brooding death more affected every phase of life in the 
salient than in any other portion of the great warfield. 

the german offensive on the bluff and the necessary measures of 
retaliation did not concern the battalion for the moment. after a 
few days aimless waiting they were sent, in bitter cold and snow, 
to restcamp at calais for a week. they were seven hours slipping 
and sliding along the snowcovered roads ere they could entrain at 
bavichore street, and untold hours detraining at the other end 
all of which annoyed them more than any bombing, even though the 
c.o. himself complimented them on their march under very trying 
circumstances. the irish, particularly in their own battalions, have 
not the relief of swearing as other races do. their temperament runs 
to extravagant comparisons and appeals to the saints, and ordinary 
foul language, even on nightreliefs in muddy trenches choked with 
loose wires and corpses, is checked by the priests. but, as one said 
what we felt on that cruel calais road, skatin into each other, 
anan apologisin, would have melted all the snows of europe that 
winter. 

bombing instruction and interplatoon bombing matches on calais beach 
kept them employed. 

on march 3, during practice with live bombs, one exploded 
prematurely, as several others of that type had done in other 
battalions, and major lord desmond fitzgerald was so severely wounded 
that he died within an hour at the millicent sutherland no. 9. red 
cross hospital. lieutenant t. e. g. nugent was dangerously wounded 
at the same time through the liver, though he did not realise this 
at the time, and stayed coolly in charge of a party till help came. 
lieutenant hanbury, who was conducting the practice, was wounded in 
the hand and leg, and father lanefox lost an eye and some fingers. 

lord desmond fitzgerald was buried in the public cemetery at calais 
on the 5th. as he himself had expressly desired, there was no formal 
parade, but the whole battalion, of which he was next for the 
command, lined the road to his grave. his passion and his loyalty had 
been given to the battalion without thought of self, and among many 
sad things few are sadder than to see the record of his unceasing 
activities and care since he had been second in command cut across by 
the curt announcement of his death. it was a little thing that his 
name had been at the time submitted for a welldeserved d.s.o. in a 
hardpressed body of men, death and sickness carry a special sting, 
because the victim knowsand in the very articles of death feels 
itwhat confusion and extra work, rearrangement and adjustments of 
responsibilities his enforced defection must lay upon his comrades. 
the winter had brought a certain amount of sickness and minor 
accidents among the officers, small in themselves, but cumulatively 
a burden. irreplaceable n.c.o.s had gone, or were going, to take 
commissions in the line others of unproven capacities had to be 
fetched forward in their place. warley, of course, was not anxious to 
send its best n.c.o.s away from a depot choked with recruits. the 
detail of life was hard and cumbersome. it was a lengthy business 
even to draw a typewriting machine for use in the trenches. companies 
two thirds full of fresh drafts had to be entrusted to officers who 
might or might not have the divine gift of leadership, and, when 
all was set, tomorrows chancespun shell might break and bury the 
most carefully thoughtout combinations. things change so quickly 
nowadays, desmond fitzgerald wrote not long before his death it is 
impossible to see ahead. and death took him on calais beach in the 
full stride of his power. 

he had quietly presented the battalion the year before with service 
drums. no mention need be made of who paid. they were the only 
battalion of the brigade which lacked them at that time, and they had 
been the only battalion to bring them out of the beginning of the 
war, when, during the retreat from mons, the artillery drove over 
the big drum at landrecies. 

temporary captain a. f. l. gordon followed lieutenant nugent as 
adjutant, and the rev. f. m. browne from g.h.q. replaced father 
lanefox. they moved into the salient again on the 6th march, 
billeting at wormhoudt, and were told several unpleasant things about 
the state of the line and the very limited amount of retaliation 
that they might expect from their own artillery. 

the snow stopped all training except a little bombing. opinion as 
to the value of bombs differed even in those early days, but they 
were the order of the day, and gave officers the chance to put in 
practice their pet theories of bowling. a commanding officer of great 
experience wrote, a year later, after the battle of arras, thanking 
heaven that that affair had led to the rediscovery of the rifle as 
a suitable weapon for infantry, adding, i swear a bomb is of all 
weapons the most futile in which to specialize. 

the french were as keen on the bomb as the rest of the world, and 
parties of officers visited our bombing competitions at wormhoudt, 
where the battalion lay till the 16th march, moving to billets 
brandhoek near vlamertinghe for st. patricks day and the sports 
sacred to the occasion. they were played into camp by a naval party 
to the tune of a life on the ocean wave, not a little to their 
astonishment. a little later they were to be even more astonished. 

then the 1st guards brigade took over their sector of the fourteenth 
divisions new front from the sixth division and, as usual, 
complained that the trenches which ran from the east to the town were 
in bad condition. the brigade reserve camp near vlamertinghe was not 
much better. it is significant that, at this date, a train, specially 
oiled and treated to run noiselessly through the night, used to take 
the reliefs up into ypresa journey that did not lack excitement. 

on the 23rd march, as the battalion was going into the trenches 
on the ypres canal bank, the meaning of that naval party at 
vlamertinghe became plainer. three naval officers and twentyfive 
petty officers on special leave appeared among them for the purpose 
of spending a happy four days with them at their labours. they wore 
the uniforms of private soldiers without pack or equipment, and were 
first seen joyously walking and talking on a wellobserved road, 
which combination of miracles led the amazed beholders to assume 
that they were either lunatics or escaped criminals of the deepest 
dye and it was a tossup that the whole cheery picnicparty was 
not arrestedor shot to save their lives. one officer, at least, 
had the liveliest memories of chaperoning for several hours a naval 
officer with a passion for professional souvenirs in the shape of 
largecalibre shell fragments. ive never been at the wrong end of 
this size gun before, the mariner would say as the german heavies 
fell. its tremendously interesting i must just make sure about 
that fuse, if you dont mind. the host, to whom 5.9s, and much 
larger, were no novelty for the canal bank dugouts did not keep 
them out had to feign an interest he did not feel till it dawned on 
the sailor that if he pursued his investigations too far he would 
be cut off by german patrols. the visitors all agreed that ships, 
under normal circumstances, were the hotel ritz compared to the daily 
trenchroutine of the army. we vaingloriously fired several rounds 
from a 9.2 to please the senior service who, naturally, had seen such 
things before. the enemy replied with two days full retaliation 
after the navy had left. 

yet, as things went in the salient, it was, like their reserve 
camp, not too uncomfortable. though there was only one workable 
communicationtrench the haymarket to their line, and that a bad 
one, the main st. jean road could be used after dark at reasonable 
risks. no work was possible by daylight, but, except for general and 
indiscriminate shelling, they lived quietly, even when, as happened 
on the first night march 23, no. 1 company and headquarters were 
solemnly misguided down the menin road in the dark over hell fire 
corner to within a few hundred yards of hooge and returned without 
even being fired at. the regimental transport, too, managed to come 
up as far as potijze with supplies, on three of the four nights of 
the battalions first tour, and had no casualties, though the woods 
were regularly shelled. this was an extraordinary stroke of luck for 
the battalion since other transports had suffered severely. 

the outstanding wonder that any one in the salient should be alive 
at all, is not referred to in the diary. men who watched the shape 
of that cape of death, raken by incessant aeroplanes and crosscut 
by gunfire that fell equally from the flanks and, as it seemed, the 
very rear, sometimes speculated, as did the french in the livelier 
hells of verdun, how long solid earth itself could hold out against 
the upheavals of the attack. flesh and blood could endurethat was 
their businessbut the ground on which they stood did not abide. as 
one man said it ud flee away in lumps under the sole of your foot, 
till there was no rest anywhere. 

their first four days tour saw three men killed in the line by 
a single whizzbang in a dugout one wounded, and an officer, 
lieutenant r. j. p. rodakowski, slightly hit by a piece of shrapnel. 
they buried their dead by night at potijze. reliefs were the real 
difficulty for the line and the roads were continuously shelled, 
and at any moment in the dusk they might find their only sound 
communicationtrench impassable. they watched it go up from end 
to end, one dreadful night on the 29th of march, when they were 
in support and the grenadiers in the line, and the kings company 
was wiped out almost to a man. it was a prelude to an attack that 
never arriveda suddenly launched, suddenly arrested, wantonness of 
destruction. coming, going, standing, or sitting still gave no minute 
of guaranteed safety. a party returning from homeleave were caught 
by a single shell in the streets of ypres on april 2. sergeantmajor 
kirk and a private were killed, and an n.c.o. and three men were 
wounded. men dropped, too, almost in the hour when they took their 
leave. they worked up the line of nights, half the shift at a time 
repairing damage, and the remainder standing by for attacks. 

on the 3rd april, after an untouched turn of duty, eight men were 
wounded by blind fire during the relief. 

at poperinghe, on april 4, they were billeted in the convent which 
supplied them with variety entertainments, cinemas, band concerts, 
and performing troupes, all liable at any moment to be dispersed by 
the enemys artillery or planes and therefore doubly precious. 
the battalion had its share of professional honour, too, in a 
matter of ceremonial. as regards the outside world the brigade of 
guards is one as regards the various battalions of it, there are 
allowable internal differences of opinion. consequently when a 
russian general, late chief of the staff to the grand duke nicholas 
of russia, visited poperinghe, and the 1st battalion of the irish 
guardsout of five guards battalions within reachwas chosen as 
the one for him to inspect, life smiled upon them, and they rose to 
the occasion. hear the words of an observer, experienced, if not 
altogether disinterested the day april 5 was lovely, and our 
fellows, in spite of their months of trenchwork, did magnificently. 
the wonderful precision of their drill excited the admiration even of 
officers belonging to some of the other regiments. the huns missed a 
grand opportunity. 

the huns had their revenge a few days later when the battalions 
billets and headquarters at poperinghe were suddenly, on april 11, 
shelled just as the battalion was going into line at ypres. the 
thing began almost with a jest. the regimental chaplain was taking 
confessions, as is usual before going up, in poperinghe church, when 
the building rocked to bursts of big stuff obviously drawing nearer. 
he turned to open the confessionalslide, and smelt gaschlorine 
beyond doubt. while he groped wildly for his gashelmet in the 
dusk, the penitent reassured him its all right, father. ive 
been to divisional gas school today. that smells off my clothes. 
relieved, the padre went on with his duties to an accompaniment 
of glass falling from the windows, and when he came out, found 
the porch filled with a small crowd who reported lots of men 
hit in an ambulance down the road. thither ran the padre to meet 
a man crazy with terror whom a shellburst had flung across the 
street, halfstripped and blackened from head to foot. he was given 
absolution, became all of a sudden vehemently sick, and dropped into 
stupor. next, on a stretcher, an irish guardsman crushed by a fallen 
wall, reported for the moment as not serious. as the priest turned 
to go, for more wounded men were being borne up through the dusk, 
the lad was retaken by a violent hmorrhage. supreme unction at once 
was his need. captain woodhouse, r.a.m.c., the regimental doctor, 
appeared out of the darkness, wounded in the arm and shoulder, his 
uniform nearly ripped off him and very busy. he had been attending 
a wounded man in a house near headquarters when a shell burst at 
the door, mortally wounded the patient, killed one stretcherbearer 
outright and seriously wounded two others. the padre, dodging shells 
en route, dived into the cellars of the house where he was billeted 
for the sacred elements, went back to the wayside dressingstation, 
found a man of the buffs, unconscious, but evidently a catholic for 
he carried a scapular sewed in his tunic, anointed him, andthe 
visitation having passed like a thunderstormtrudged into ypres 
unworried by anything worse than casual machinegun fire, and set 
himself to find some sufficiently large sound cellar for battalion 
mass next morning. the battalion followed a little later and went 
underground in ypresheadquarters and a company in the carmelite 
convent, two companies in the solid brick and earth ramparts that 
endure to this day, and one in the cellars of the rue de malines. 

it was the mildest of upheavalsa standardpattern affair hardly 
noted by any one, but it serves to show what a priests and a 
doctors duties are when the immediate heavy silence after a 
shellburst, that seems so astoundingly long, is cut by the outcries 
of wounded men, and the two hurry off together, stumbling and feeling 
through the dark, till the electric torch picks up some dim, veiled 
outline, or hideously displays the wounds on the body they seek. 
there is a tale of half a platoon among whom a heavy gasshell 
dropped as they lay in the flank of a cutting beside a road. their 
platooncommander hurried to them, followed by the sergeant, calling 
out to know the extent of the damage. no one replied. the question 
was repeated. then speak up when the officers askin, cried the 
scandalized sergeant. but even that appeal failed. they were all dead 
where they lay, and, human nature being what it is, the sergeants 
words became a joke against him for many days after. men cannot live 
in extreme fear for more than a very limited time. normal little 
interests save them so while they lay in cellars by candlelight 
at ypres and worked stealthily at night, the battalion found time 
to make a most beautiful irish star, four feet across, of glass and 
pounded brick from the rubbish of the convent garden. it was a work 
of supererogation, accomplished while cleaning up the billets, which 
drew favourable notice from high authorities. 

on the 16th april they were shifted to relieve the 2nd grenadiers at 
railway wood northwest of hooge. this was almost the most easterly 
point of the salient on the north of the menin road by the roulers 
railway, and ranked as quite the least desirable stretch of an 
acutely undesirable line. in addition to every other drawback, the 
wood welled water at every pore, for the bellewaarde beck brought to 
it all the drainage from the bellewaarde ridge, and even the trenches 
on high ground were waterlogged. they were bombed from overhead as 
soon as they moved in hell fire corner was shelled on the 1zth april 
and six men were wounded. 

the 18th april was quiet, only two men wounded, and except for 
violent bombardments, north and south, and an attack on wieltje and 
other places, so was the 19th. wieltje was two thousand yards, 
and the other places even farther away. the disturbance was 
nothing more than principal german attacks on four different fronts 
of the salient among mud and mudfilled shellholes and craters of 
old mines where men sunk and choked where they fought waistdeep 
in the dirt where the clogged rifles were useless, and the bomb 
and the bayonet were the only hope. from any reasonable point of 
view the salient was a particularly weak position, always worth an 
attack in the intervals of its regular use as a gunnery school for 
german artillery. the enemy knew that we were on the way to take the 
pressure off the french at verdun, which had been a factory of death 
since february, and argued that it would be well to make trouble 
anywhere they could. they chose the 1st and 2nd canadian divisions 
round ypres, and fought them for two days with very little profit 
beyond filling more shellholes with more dead. 

at that date men had learned by experience the comparative values 
of their flanking divisions and the battalions immediately beside 
them. when a local attack fell on some of these, those unaffected 
would rest as unconcernedly as the watch below takes its ease when 
the watch on deck is struggling with the squall. the syrenlike hoot 
of the gashorns, one or two miles off, might break their rest on 
relief, but the division involved being known to be adequate, the 
battalion was not roused and spent a quiet day. other divisions, 
new to the line caused anxiety and interfered with regular routine, 
till they had shaken into place and yet others might be always 
trusted to hoot and signal for help on the least provocation. 
these peculiarities would be discussed in the cantonments and 
coffeebars of the restareas, or, later, out on the roadside 
with an occasional farranging german shell to interrupt a really 
pleasant interbattalion or divisional argument where, if reports 
be true, even the military police sometimes forget to be impartial. 
and there were unambitious, unimproving units quite content to 
accept anything that their predecessors had left them in the way of 
openwork parapets, gapped sandbags, and smashed traverses. against 
these, experienced corps builded, not without ostentation, strong 
flanks so that if their neighbours went of a sudden, they themselves 
might still have a chance for their lives. the irish had a saying 
of their owna sort of lilting call that ran down the trenches at 
odd timesto the effect that god being in his heaven and the 
micks in the line, all was well. pompom every battalion, too, 
had its own version of the ancient warsong which claims that they 
themselves were in the front line with their best friends of the 
moment immediately behind them, but that when they went to look for 
suchandsuch a battalion with whom they were unfriends for the 
moment, they were blessed or otherwise if they could find them. 

theirs was the misfortune to be the only battalion of the division 
available for fatigues during their sixteen days tour so they 
supplied parties without intermission, both to the trenches round 
railway wood, and in battered ypres in the cellars where they rested 
by candlelight to the accompaniment of crashing masonry and flying 
pavement blocks. a fatigueparty, under lieutenant t. k. walker, 
carrying engineers stuff to near railway wood, was caught and 
shelled on the 24th, on the last two hundred yards or so of utterly 
exposed duckboards, every piece of which the enemy guns had taped to 
a yard. the waterlogged soil made any sort of trenches here out of 
the question. men slid, and staggered across the open under their 
loads till the shells chose to find them, or they reached railway 
wood and found some cover in the mine which was always being made 
there and always pumped out. lieutenant walker and four men were 
killed at once and seven men were wounded, of whom two afterwards 
died. it was as swift as the shelling of headquarters at poperinghe 
on the 11th and captain woodhouse, the m.o., had to get forward to 
the wreckage under a heavy fire of shells and aerial torpedoes. with, 
or not far from him, went, crawled, ran or floundered the priest for 
if by any means the body could be relieved, repaired or eased, so 
could the soul. it is true that both these men more or less respected 
direct orders not to expose themselves too much, but they suffered 
from curious lapses of memory. 

then spring came to the salient in one swift rush, so warm and so 
windless that, at the end of april, when they were in rest under 
leafing trees at poperinghe, it was possible to dine in shirt 
sleeves in the open by candle and starlight. the gentle weather 
even softened the edge of war for a day or two, till ypres and the 
neighbourhood were vigorously shelled on the 5th may. the battalion 
was then in ypres prison and the cellars beneath it, where some 
unloved enthusiast had discovered that there was plenty of room for 
drill purposes in the main gaolcorridor, and drilled they were 
accordingly to the music of the bombardments. on such occasions 
men were sometimes seen to budge, i.e. roll their eyes in the 
direction of plaster and stones falling from the ceiling, for which 
heinous crime their names were justly taken. 

on the 9th may they relieved the 2nd grenadiers on the left sector of 
their brigades front at wieltje, where what were once trenches had 
been bombed and shelled into a sketchy string of bombingpostsor 
as a man said, grousebutts. it was perhaps one degree worse than 
their stretch at hooge and necessitated companies and posts being 
scattered, as the ground served, between what was left of wieltje, 
st. jean, and la brique. the enemy opened by shelling the reserve 
company no. 4 at st. jean and wounding eight men, while their 
machinegun fire held up all work in the front line where no. 1 
company was trying to dig a communicationtrench through old dirt and 
dead to no. 2 company in support. 

the demonstration might have meant anything or nothing, but to be on 
the safe side and to comply with brigade orders, regular observation 
and snipers posts were posted henceforward, and lieutenant 
rodakowski was struck off all trench duties as intelligence and 
sniping officer. the arrangements and supervision of a dozen or so 
snipers, imaginative, stolid or frankly bored, as the case might be, 
and the collation of their various reports based for very little 
could be actually seen on the celtic imagination operating at large 
the whole to be revised and corrected from hour to hour by ones own 
faculties of observation and deduction make intelligence work a 
little strenuous. 

on the 12th may st. jean, which included battalion headquarters, half 
way between st. jean and wieltje, was heavily shelled for eight hours 
of the night with heavy stuffbut no casualties beyond a couple of 
men wounded. 

on the 18th may, when they were in the line once more, the enemy 
who had recently been remarkably quiet made an attempt to rush a 
bombingpost, but, says the diary, lieutenant tisdall and 4182 
private a. young came upon them unexpectedly, and owing to the 
formers coolness and the latters vigorous offensive action with 
rifle and bombs, the hostile party, about twenty, fled. the diary 
is never emotional in such little matters as these, and the officers 
concerned say less than nothing. it is the oldtimers among the men 
who cherish memories of the vigorous offensive action. no pen dare 
put on paper the speech of the orderly who, with rifle and bomb, 
erupts along the trench or over the edge of the shellcrater either 
in deadly silence or with threatenings and slaughter in his own 
dialect, and, when the quick grisly business is over, convulses his 
associates with his private version of it. 

the orderly got the d.c.m. and the officer the military cross. 

the enemy retaliated next night by shelling the support line and 
wounded seven men just as the battalion was going into rest and 
was relieved late, which they noticed with deep displeasure, by a 
battalion of the twentieth division. 

the 20th may saw them in the clean backarea at the pleasant 
welltreed village of longuenesse, three miles southwest of st. 
omer, all together in good billets and plenty of clean straw at one 
farm headquarters at a neighbouring chteau, the 2nd coldstream, 
their particular friends with them, and the other battalions of their 
brigade at villages near by. the weather was good for a week at 
least work was reasonable, and they all went to pay a visit disguised 
as a battalion drill to the parade ground of the cadetschool at 
blendecques, of which lieutenant j. halligan, late orderlyroom 
quartermastersergeant of the battalion, was adjutant. it is 
reasonable to infer that the russian general at the poperinghe camp 
got no better in the way of a ceremonial parade than did their old 
comrade. 

the shadow of preparations for the somme fell over them afterwards. 
they dug quadruple lines of trenches and assaulted them in full kit 
with gas helmets and found time, between whiles, to hold a boxing 
competition, at which the 12th lancers arrived with their private 
young, who was defeated by the battalions company sergeantmajor 
voyles. these things are as sacred as the eton dinner at st. omer on 
the 3rd june, which seven officers from the battalion attended. 

on the zth june they moved on a twelvemile march to hondeghem, under 
cassel, en route for a poperinghe camp once more, and developed 
several cases of sore feet. this was put down to a bad issue of 
socks, but it supports the theory of the sergeants mess, that 
nothing but careful inspection, coupled with steady routemarching, 
can put a foot on men who have been paddling in trenchmud with 
twisted, waterlogged boots. 

at poperinghe they were coolies again till they went into line on the 
15th june. a permanent fatigueparty of 150, under 2nd lieutenants 
hegarty and earle, was sent to the engineers near ypres. another, a 
hundred strong, helped to bury fieldcables by night at brielen on 
the ypreselverdinghe road, a place much sought after by the enemys 
artillery. but digging is reckoned better than drill, and their next 
tour of duty was to be a wearisome one. lieutenant j. n. marshall 
from the entrenching battalion joined on the 15th, and lieutenant j. 
k. greer took command of no. 1 company, lieutenant law being on a 
course. 

they relieved the 11th essex and the 8th bedfordshires sixth 
division on the night of the 16th, in the surprisingly short time 
of one hour, which was nearly a record and showed that all hands 
were abreast of their work. their new sector lay northwest of 
wieltje and due north of ypres, covering the yprespilckem road, 
with supports at lancashire farm, and the battalion headquarters amid 
loose bricks and mud on the canal bank. the trenches were bad only 
one communicationtrench skipton road was moderately dry, and the 
parapets were thin, low and badly gapped, which gave enemy snipers 
their chance. two men were killed outright the first day one died of 
wounds and four were wounded. 

no mans land at this point was several hundred yards deep, and 
covered with long grass and weeds. the periscopes soon learned to 
know that poppies and thistles grew brightest and tallest round the 
edges of shellholes, and since shellholes meant cover, all patrols 
directed their bellyflat course to them. 

on the 18th june officer patrols went out to look at the enemys 
wire. second lieutenant f. h. n. lee was wounded in the leg while 
close to it, and was carried back by no. 3836 corporal redmond dying 
later of gangrene. another officer, lieutenant hon. p. ogilvy, ran 
by mistake into wire on his return journey, and had to fight his way 
back with his orderly. one man was killed and one wounded, besides 
the wounded officer. 

on the 19th lieutenant j. n. marshall, while out with a 
workingparty, was sniped in the arm, but finished his work before 
reporting it. a man was killed and two were wounded. the day was 
normalprobably the quietest of the tour, says the diary, but 
one may be certain that certain inconspicuous german snipers were 
congratulating themselves on their bag. the bulk of the trouble came 
from five old dugouts known as the canadian dugouts, some two or 
three hundred yards away, which had once been in our hands. these had 
been wired round collectively and individually, and their grassgrown 
irregular moundage made perfect snipers nests. 

the battalion lay, from the 21st to the 23rd june, in shelters round 
and cellars beneath elverdinghe chteau, the trees of which were 
still standing, so that it was possible to put in an inspection and 
a little drill beneath them, but careful watch had to be kept for 
hostile aeroplanes. drill under these circumstances is discipline 
of the highest. tis not the dhrill, yell understand, but the 
not budgin in the ranks thats so hard to come by. for, yell 
understand, that you cant help liftin an eye when you hear them 
buzzin above. and, of course, if a man budges on parade, hell be 
restless when hes shelled. 

our artillery had been cutting german wire on the front of the 
division with the idea of raids to follow. consequently, there was 
nightfiring on both sides when the battalion went back on the 24th. 
the trenches had been a little improved, and one man only was killed 
and one wounded by the snipers. 

on the 26th june four men were sniped. on the 2zth june wirecutting 
by our guns drew heavy retaliation from the enemy. lieutenant f. l. 
pusch, d.s.o., as brave a man as the war made, who had only come up 
from the entrenching battalion a few days before, was sniped and 
killed at once. he had gone with his orderly to pick up a wounded man 
in a trench, and both were hit by the same bullet. the sniper did his 
best to kill private carroll, who dragged the wounded man and the 
officers body under cover. private carroll was awarded the military 
medal for this. four dead and seven wounded were that nights total. 

the 28th june was the worst of that tour. the enemy opened on 
the trenches and supports through night and day with everything 
available, down to aerial torpedoes, killing five men and wounding 
eight. 

the casualties for a quiet twelve days tour, including three days 
only in the front line, were three officers and fortyseven other 
ranks killed and wounded. some of the credit of this must go to the 
german snipers, who, working without noise or display, gave the 
battalion the idea there was nothing much doing. the brutal outcry of 
artillery, its visible effect on the groundabove all, the deadly 
accuracy of the single aimed shells on the wellregistered trench 
from which none must moveupset men sometimes more than repeated 
single casualties in the front line, which can be hurried off round 
the traverses without rousing more than a few companions. 

they lay for a week beneath the trees near poperinghe and started 
interplatoon bombing competitions to accustom the men to throw 
overarm without jerking. these little events forbade monotony, and 
were sometimes rather like real warfare, for not every one can be 
trusted to deliver a ball accurately when he is throwing in against 
time. 


the somme 

meanwhile, verdun had been in the fire since february, there was no 
sign of the attacks on it weakening, and france and the world looked 
uneasily at that dread point of contact where men and stuff consumed 
as the carbon of arclights consumes in the current. it was time 
that england should take the strain, even though her troops were not 
fully trained or her guns yet free to spend shells as the needs of 
the war demanded. what had gone before was merely the initial deposit 
on the price of national unpreparedness what was to come, no more 
than a first instalment. it was vital to save verdun to so hold the 
enemy on the western front that he could not send too much help to 
his eastern line or his austrian allies, who lay heavy on the italian 
army most vital, to kill as many germans as possible. 

the main strength, the actual spine of the position, so far as the 
british front was concerned, was some twentyfive miles of high 
ground forming the watershed between the somme and the rivers of 
southern belgium, which ran, roughly, from maricourt in the south, 
where our line joined the french, to gomiecourt in the north. here 
the enemy had sat untroubled for two years, looking down upon 
france and daily strengthening himself. his trebled and quadrupled 
lines of defence, worked for him by his prisoners, ran below and 
along the flanks and on the tops of fivehundredfoot downs. some 
of these were studded with close woods, deadlier even than the 
fortified villages between them some cut with narrowing valleys 
that drew machinegun fire as chimneys draw drafts some opening 
into broad, seemingly smooth slopes, whose every haunch and hollow 
covered sunk forts, carefully placed minefields, machinegun pits, 
gigantic quarries, enlarged in the chalk, connecting with systems 
of catacomblike dugouts and subterranean works at all depths, in 
which brigades could lie till the fitting moment. belt upon belt of 
fiftyyarddeep wire protected these points, either directly or at 
such angles as should herd and hold up attacking infantry to the fire 
of veiled guns. nothing in the entire system had been neglected or 
unforeseen, except knowledge of the nature of the men, who in due 
time, should wear their red way through every yard of it. 

neither side attempted to conceal their plans. the work of our airmen 
would have been enough to have warned the enemy what was intended, 
even had his own men overlooked the immense assembly of troops and 
guns in a breadth of country that had been remodelled for their 
needs, above ground and below. our battalions in the salient, where 
the unmolested german aeroplanes bombed them, knew well enough that, 
in the phrase of the moment, everything had gone south, and our 
listeningposts in the front line round ypres could tell very fairly 
when a german demonstration was prompted by natural vice or orders 
to cover a noisy withdrawal of their guns in the same direction. it 
did not need placards in english, come on, we are ready for you 
which were hoisted in some of the german trenches on that somme front 
to make men wiser than they had been for weeks past. 

side by side with this elaborate and particular knowledge, plus a 
multitude of camprumours, even more circumstantial, was the immense 
incuriousness that always exists in veteran armies. fresh drafts 
would pour out from england filled with vain questions and the 
hope of that immediate open warfare, so widely advertised, to be 
told they would know all about it when their turn came, and that, 
meantime, deep trenches were not bad things after all. when they 
had looked for a little on the full face of war, they were content 
to copy their elders and ask no questions. they understood it was 
to be a wearingout battle. very many men had already been worn out 
and cast aside in the mere detail of preparation, in building the 
light and broadgauge railways of supply and the roads beside them 
in fetching up and installing timber, hutments, hangars, telephones, 
hospitals, pipelines for water, and the thousand other necessities 
of mechanical war. as it happened to individuals, so, they knew, 
would it be with the battalions, brigades and divisions of all the 
armies which general rawlinson on the 1st of july moved up against 
that fortress of a whole countryside, called in history the somme. 

and while that storm gathered and broke, the battalion went on with 
its horrible necessary work in the salient till the hour should come 
for it and its division to be cast into the furnace and used up with 
the rest. 

on the zth july they moved as a support to the broken and filthy 
banks of the canal north of ypres and sat in dugouts connected by 
a tunnel and begirt with water and mud. except for a mere nightly 
fatigue of a couple of hundred men, the diary noted that there 
was no training possible but there was little shelling. the 2nd 
grenadiers were in the line which the battalion relieved 11th july 
on a broken and marshy front, between buffs road and forward cottage 
with battalion headquarters near st. jean and the 3rd coldstream on 
their left. they were shelled during relief, when lieutenant christy, 
who, but a little while before, had just escaped a snipers bullet 
through the loophole, was killed. 

that same morning four germans wormed their way through the rank 
grass and broken ground and for a while almost captured an isolated 
post of six men of no. 1 company. they tried, indeed, to march them 
off as prisoners, but the irish edged away under cover of the next 
platoons fire, and all got back safely. the day closed with heavy 
bombardments from 5.9s. an officer and three other ranks killed and 
seventeen wounded were counted as a light casualtylist considering 
the bad cover. no man could stand upright for an instant, and all 
repairs, parapets, and drainage work were done at night, stooping and 
crawling between spurts of machinegun hosework. 

the 13th july was another light day with but seven men wounded. 
second lieutenant g. v. williams joined from the base and major c. f. 
fleming went sick on the 14th. the sector being rather too active and 
noisy of nights just then, a patrol under lieutenant j. n. marshall 
went out to see what the enemy might intend in the way of digging a 
sap across no mans land. the lieutenant was wounded in the side 
as he left the trench, but insisted on doing his work and was out 
two hours for which he paid by having to go into hospital a month 
later. their casualties on the 15th, when they were relieved by the 
2nd grenadiers and went back to their dugouts by the canal, were 
five wounded, one of whom died. out of this tense life were suddenly 
chosen an officer and twenty men to form part of the contingent 
representing our armies at the french review in paris on the 14th 
july. they were chiefly veterans of 1914, and under captain j. s. n. 
fitzgerald, then of the 2nd battalion, repaired to a bright clean 
city where a man could hold up his head, walking in unchoked streets 
between roofed and glazed houses and the day after the glittering 
affair was over they returned to their brickheaps and burrows in the 
flanders mire. 

on the battalions next turn july 1822, suspecting that the enemy 
might be newly relieved, our patrols worked hard night after night 
to catch prisoners for identification purposes. 2346 lancecorporal 
hennigan, a regimental character and a man of strong powers of 
leadership, with 5z43 private obrien, of whom, too, many tales are 
told, were marked as very prominent in the work. but the germans 
took great care not to leave men or corpses about, and they got 
nothing for their toil. 

on the 23rd july orders came that their expected term of rest was to 
be cancelled as the division would go elsewhere, which all knew 
meant towards the somme. there were five days yet ere the battalion 
drew clear of the salient, each day with its almost unnoticed 
casualty that in the long run makes the bulk of the bills of war, and 
brings home the fact that the lifeblood of the battalion is dripping 
away. the support platoons were reckoned lucky to have only one man 
killed on the 23rd after bombardment by a sixinch highexplosive 
gun. captain pollok, who took over command of no. 1 company on 
the same day, was wounded two days later, just after relief, by a 
machinegun bullet and their last normal day in the trenches gave 
one sergeant killed and three other ranks wounded. 

they were relieved on the 2zth july, after dark as usual, by the 
1st royal warwicks, recently come from the south, having been in 
the fighting there. the warwicks knew the somme. they looked on 
the clean, creosoted, deepbayed, highparapeted trenches they were 
to hold and announced that they would feel cushy in such a line. 
cushy said the brigade. wait till youve had to live in em 
but, said the warwicks, you see, weve been fighting. the large 
guardsmen looked at the little worn linesmen and swallowed it in 
silence. the 4th division, to which the warwicks belonged, had been 
part of that terrible northern attack along the line from serre to 
fricourt, which had spent itself in vain against the german defence 
a month before, and had been ground and milled day by day since. but 
all that the diary notices is that that last relief was carried out 
smoothly and quietly in what to the warwicks, after such experience, 
must have been grateful peace. 

after their three weeks in dugouts, the battalion rested and washed 
south of merry poperinghe which had been heavily shelled and for 
some days completely evacuated. 

between march 18 and july 18, excluding four weeks in rest, they had 
lost four officers and thirty other ranks killed five officers and a 
hundred and fiftythree other ranks woundeda total of one hundred 
and ninetytwo, in the mere routine of the slow days. 

there was a saying of the war, no one notices weather in the front 
line and it is curious that, so soon as the battalion was above 
ground, walking under naked skies with light and air all round 
it, men dwelt on weather as almost a new discovery. they found it 
hot when the division entrained at proven for st. pol. fortytwo 
trains took the division and fortyseven lorries bore the battalion 
itself from st. pol to bouquemaison on the doullens road. there, 
headquarters were in an orchard beneath unbarked trees with leaves on 
the branches and a background of gunvoices from the somme, to remind 
the men who laughed and talked in that shadow and sun what waited for 
them after this short return to real life. 

they moved on the 4th august to vauchelleslesauthies, the 
matchboard huts of which, on the trampled ground, have been likened 
to a demobbed poultry show. it lay just off the wellworn 
doullensalbert road, now flooded with a steady current of troops 
and material. they waited there for ten days. during that time 2nd 
lieutenant cook 4th connaught rangers, lieutenant t. butlerstoney 
from the entrenching battalion, and lieutenant n. butler from 
hospital joined them. 

the regimental band arrived from england for a three months tour. 
the officer who accompanied it wore a woundstripethe very first 
which the battalion collectively had ever seenand men wondered 
whether woundstripes would become common, and how many one might 
accumulate. it was removed from the officer by laughing friends, as 
a matter something too suggestive in present company, and the band 
played in the still warm evenings, while the dust of feet going 
sommeward rose and stretched unbroken along the doullensalbert 
pav. here the very treeboles, before they began to be stripped and 
splintered by shellfire, were worn and rubbed beneath the touch of 
mens shoulders and gnawed by the halted horses. 

the king came on the 9th august to visit the division. special 
arrangements were impossible, so bombingassault practice went 
on, while the officers of the battalion were presented to him in 
the orchard where the messes were pitched. he made no orations, 
uttered no threats against his enemies, nor guaranteed the personal 
assistance of any tribal god. his regiments merely turned out and 
cheered the inconspicuous car as long as they could see it. but there 
is a story that a frenchman, an old royalist, in whose wood some 
officers had rigged a temporary hut of which he highly disapproved, 
withdrew every claim and complaint on the promise that the chair in 
which the king of england had sat should be handed over to him, duly 
certificated. which was done. 

on the 11th the brigade moved over the open country via louvencourt 
and bertrancourt to the woods south of maillymaillet, a sixmile 
march in hot and dusty weather, and the brigade 2nd grenadiers, 
3rd coldstream, 2nd coldstream in reserve and 1st irish guards in 
support took over trenches east of englebelmer and well within the 
shell area. thiepval and the schwaben redoubt across the ancre were 
only a thousand yards away and unsubdued and, for a while, it looked 
as though that weary corner of death was to be the guards objective. 
but, next day, orders came to move out of the line again, back to 
high and breezy louvencourt in warm rain, taking over billets from 
the 2nd sherwood foresters and, by immense good luck, coming across 
a heavensent expeditionary force canteen, a thing not often found 
in frontline billets. upon this, pay was at once arranged for, and 
every one shopped at large. the incident stayed in their minds long 
after the details of mere battles were forgotten, and that canteen 
at louvencourt is a landmark of old memories. 

by this date the battle of the somme was six weeks old, and our 
troops had eaten severalin some places as much as five or 
sixthousand yards deep into the area. two main attacks had been 
deliveredthat of the 1st july, which had lasted till the 14th, 
and that of the 14th, which went on till the end of the month. 
from serre to ovillerslaboiselle the germans front stood fast 
from ovillerslaboiselle to the junction with the french armies 
at hardecourt, the first tremendous system of their defence had 
been taken literally a few score yards at a time, trench by trench, 
village by village, quarry by quarry, and copse by copse, lost, won, 
and held again from three to eight or nine times. a surge forward 
on some part of the line might succeed in making good a few hundred 
yards of gain without too heavy loss. an isolated attack, necessary 
to clear a flank or to struggle towards some point of larger command, 
withered under enormous far concentrations of enemy guns, even as 
the woods withered to snapped, charred stickage. at every step and 
turn, hosts of machineguns at groundlevel swept and shaved the 
forlorn landscapes and when the utmost had been done for the day, 
the displaced germans seemed always to occupy the crest of some yet 
higher down. villages and woods vanished in the taking were stamped 
into, or blown out of, the ground, leaving only their imperishable 
names. so, in the course of inconceivable weeks fell mametz and the 
ranked woods behind it, contalmaison, montauban, and caterpillar 
wood, bernafay, trnes wood, longueval, and the fringe of delville 
even then a charnelhouse among shattered stumps, both bazentins, 
and pozires of the australians. the few decencies and accommodations 
of the old settled trenchlife were gone men lived as best they 
could in the open among eternal shellholes and mounds of heaped 
rubbish that were liable at any moment to be dispersed afresh under 
constant menace of gas, blinded with the smokescreens of local 
attacks, and beaten down from every point of the compass either 
by enemy fire, suddenly gathered and loosed, or that of their own 
heavies searching, from miles off, some newly cleared hollow or 
skyline of the uplands where our troops lay indistinguishable from 
the skinned earth. 

battalions, brigades, and divisions went into the fight, were worn 
down in more or in less time, precisely as the chances of the ground 
either screened or exposed them for a while to the fireblasts. 
sometimes it was only a matter of hours before what had been a 
brigade ceased to existhad soaked horribly into the ground. the 
wastage was brought down and back across the shellholes as well 
as might be, losses were made good, and with a half, two thirds, 
or three quarters, new drafts, the original battalion climbed 
back to its task. while some development behind the next fold of 
land was in progress or brought to a standstill, they would be 
concerned only with the lifeanddeath geography of the few hundred 
yards immediately about them, or those few score yards over which 
profitable advances could be made. a day, even an hour, later, the 
use and value of their own hollow or ridge might be altogether 
abolished. what had been a hardly won foothold would become the very 
pivot of a central attack, or subside into a sheltered haven of 
refuge, as the next dominating ridge or lap of the largeboned french 
landscape was cleared. equally suddenly, even while the men thanked 
god for their respite, german batteries or a suddenly pushedforth 
chain of german machineguns would pound or spray their shelter into 
exposed torment once more. 

as one philosopher of that unearthly epoch put it some time 
afterwards we was like fleas in a blanket, yell understand, seein 
no more than the next nearest wrinkle. but jerry and our generals, 
yell understand, they kept us hoppin. 

our generals, who, it may be presumed, knew all the wrinkles of 
the blanket, shifted the brigade on the 16th august opposite serre 
on the far left of the line, which was not destined to be pierced 
till the next year. it was a fleeting transfer to another army corps 
their own, the fourteenth, under lord cavan, having joined the fourth 
army. they took over from the somerset l.i. 61st brigade a set of 
trenches which, after their experiences in the salient, struck them 
as dry, deep and good, but odd and unhomely. they had been french, 
were from six to nine feet deep, paved in places with stone, which 
our men had never seen in trenches before, and revetted with strange 
french stickwork. the dugouts, too, were not of their standard 
patterns. the front line was badly battered, but reliefs could be 
effected in broad daylight without casualties. the activities and 
comforting presence of our aeroplanes impressed them also as a great 
contrast to ypres, where, naturally, our troops for the moment held 
only a watchingbrief and every machine that could be spared had gone 
to the somme. the dead of the opening battles lay thick about the 
place. the irish buried two hundred of a division that had passed 
that way, five weeks or so before, and salved, with amazement at 
its plenty, the wreckage of their equipment. theres the world 
and all out there, sorr, said a man returning from his work. the 
very world an all machineguns andhis voice dropping in sheer 
awerumjars they were unmolested, save by a few minenwerfers. 
undertakers work does not hearten any troops, and they were glad to 
get back to hutments in the untouched woods behind authie, near their 
old poultryshow. during these days 2nd lieutenants j. n. ward 
and t. gibson joined from home, the latter going to the firstline 
transport and captain l. r. hargreaves took over no. 2 company on 
joining from home on the 20th. 

on the 23rd august they moved with the brigade across to beauval on 
the doullensamiens road where camps and hutments almost touched 
each other, and on the 25th embarked at canaples in a horror called 
a tactical train, which was stuffed with two thousand of their 
brigade. after slow and spasmodic efforts it bore them quite fifty 
kilometres in seven hours to mricourt labb, whence they marched to 
maulte in a green hollow under the downs, and found themselves once 
more in their own fourteenth corps under lord cavan. more immediately 
to the point, and a thing long remembered, their billets were damp, 
dirty, and full of fleas the weather that was destined to ruin the 
campaign broke in torrents of rain, and the continuous traffic of 
stuff had knocked the very bowels out of all the hardworked roads. 
this was the first time they realised what the grey clinging somme 
mud meant. 

they trained in that wet at bombing, at assaulting from trenches, at 
visual signalling to aeroplanes, and at marking out trenches by night 
with white tapes, as scores of thousands had done before them, while 
the roar of the guns rose and dropped without explanation, like the 
tumult of unseen crowds and rumours and contradictory orders for 
standing fast or leaving on the instant kept them in tension for ten 
days. but, most wonderful of all to the men from the salient, where 
silence and guarded movement were automatic, was the loud life of 
this openair world of troops around themmen and guns spread over 
the breadth of countieshorses in the open by thousands ranked in 
endless horselinesprocessions of roaring lorries and deeprumbling 
heavy guns and, only a few miles awaythe war in full blast. it was 
possible to catch a ride in a lorry and go up and see the war, as 
the saying ran. yonder, but a very little way, stretched horizons, 
downs, and tablelands as far as imagination could range. all the 
firmament groaned to the artillery hidden and striving within them 
and statelily, and regularly and unceasingly, the vast spaces of 
open were plumed with vertical columns of changeful shellsmoke. 
men perceived that everything they had known, till then, had been a 
fieldday. here was the war 

a story that a wonderful new weapon would soon appear was very 
general. some one had halfseen or been told about the tanks in their 
wellscreened shelters one or two overzealous english journals had 
been industriously hinting at the developments of science the enemy 
was uneasy, and, germanfashion, had issued portentous instruction to 
his men to be on their guard against something. but, however short 
his training, the british infantryman is a born scoffer. we had 
heard about moving forts that weighed thirty ton, said one of them. 
whatever it might be, we knew wed have to take the thick o the 
coffee. 

the local battles and operations on the southern stretch of the 
front, now immediately in front of the battalion, were almost as 
indistinguishable as waves on a beach that melt into or rise out of 
each other in the main flood. but there was a fresh tidal movement 
at the beginning of september, when our whole line attacked again, 
in conjunction with the french. we gained nothing of any account in 
the north, but in the south guillemont fell, and, after desperate 
attack and counterattack, almost all of ginchy and the whole 
thousandyardsquare of delville wood and the south end of high wood. 

the net result up to the middle of september had been to advance and 
establish the centre of our line on the crest of the high ground 
from delville wood to the road above mouquet farm thiepval and its 
outworks still untaken, so that we had observation over the slopes 
ahead. from delville wood eastward to leuzehistorically known as 
lousy woodoverlooking the little town of combles on our right 
flank, our advance held the main ridge of land there, but had not 
gone beyond it. still farther east, across the valley where combles 
stood, the french were working north along the heights towards 
saillysaillisel, three thousand yards away. their line was pinched 
on the right by the big st. pierre vaast woods, fortified throughout. 
their left was almost equally constricted by the valley where 
combles, among its quarries and hidden shelters, squatted and dealt 
death, which all the heights to the northmorval, lesbufs and le 
transloyjoined, with saillysaillisel and st. pierre vaast in the 
east, to make more sure. it was necessary, then, to free the ground 
at the junction of the two armies in the direction of morval, which 
commanded far too complete a fire and also beyond ginchy towards 
lesbufs, where the outlying spurs of high land raked lousy wood. 

that clearingup, a comparatively small detail on a vast front, fell 
to the lot of the fourteenth army corps lord cavan commanding, 
which lay between ginchy village and leuze wood. the corps was made 
up of the fiftysixth london territorial division, on the extreme 
right or east, next to the french the sixth division, a little north 
of leuze wood, facing the quadrilateral, a veiled defensive work as 
strong as ample time and the ground could make it, and destined to 
turn the fortunes of that day and on the left of the sixth, again, 
the guards division in front of what remained of ginchy, ginchy farm 
and orchard, all strongly held by the germans, and some battered 
brickfields hard by. 

lord cavan did not overstate the case in his message to the guards 
division just before the attack when he wrote the corps commander 
knows that there are difficulties to be cleared up on the left and in 
front of the 1st guards brigade and on the right of the 2nd guards 
brigade, but the commanderinchief is of opinion that the general 
situation is so favourable that every effort should be made to take 
advantage of it, etc., etc. 

a battalion looks at life from a more limited standpoint. brigade 
orders issued on the 11th september announced the french army 
will attack the enemy defences between combles ravine, and 
martinpuich on z day, with the object of seizing morval, lesbufs, 
gueudecourt and flers, and breaking through the enemys defences. 
but what interested the irish, who prefer fighting light, even as 
the frenchman can shuffle into action under all his highpiled 
possessions, was the amount of weight they would have to carry up 
there. it included two days rations, a couple of bombs, two extra 
bandoliers of ammunition, a pick or a shovel and three sandbags 
per man, plus wirecutters and other fittings. on the other hand, 
greatcoats and packs were discarded and cardigan waistcoats worn 
beneath their jackets. 

on the 10th september the battalion, with the 1st brigade, moved in 
from maulte to the valley behind carnoy, and, after dark that night, 
nos. 3 and 4 companies, under major t. m. d. bailie, were ordered up 
through bernafay wood to a line of what passed for trenches behind 
ginchy, and next morning nos. 1 and 2 captain hargreaves and captain 
rankin bivouacked in some old trenches at the north end of bernafay, 
where they were used in carryingfatigues for the 3rd guards brigade, 
then in the front line. the other two companies were heavily shelled 
in their ginchy trenches, and lost seven killed and thirteen wounded. 
a bombing accident in bivouac the day before had also wounded six men. 

on the 12th september no. 1 company, stationed in a small copse near 
trnes wood, which was choked with wreckage and dead, had three of 
their lewisgunners killed and five wounded by a single shell. 

on the 13th september the battalion spent a quiet day with only one 
killed and seven wounded, except for a deadly tiring fatigue of 
carrying bombs to guillemont under shellfire. our artillery began 
on the 12th, and continued day and night without much break till the 
hour of advance on the 15th, when it changed to the duly ordered 
stationary and creeping barrages of the fieldguns. 


the 15th september 

on the evening of the 14th, the 1st brigade of guards moved out 
to the shellholes and fragments of trench that formed their 
assemblypositions, on a front of five hundred yards between delville 
wood and the northern flank of ginchy. there it lay in the cold with 
the others till zero, 6.20 a. m. of the 15th. the 2nd and 3rd 
coldstream had the front line, for they were to lead the attack 
the 2nd grenadiers lay behind to support them and consolidate 
the first objectivea line of trench about twelve hundred yards 
northeastand to hold it till the 1st irish guards came up and 
had passed through them. then, if the flanks were secure, the 2nd 
grenadiers were to come on and support in turn. the 1st irish guards 
were to pass through the 2nd and 3rd coldstream after the latter 
battalions had reached the third objective, another line of trench 
twentyfive hundred yards off, and were thence to go and take the 
final objectivethe northern outskirts of lesbufs, thirtyfive 
hundred yards from their jumpingoff place. there was a limited 
objective, three hundred yards beyond the first, which worked in with 
the advance towards flers of the divisions on the left of the guards 
from delville wood to martinpuich. it was supposed to concern only 
the battalion 2nd coldstream on the left flank of the 1st brigade. 

incidentally, it was announced that as soon as all the objectives had 
been seized, cavalry would advance and seize the heights ahead. 

the battalion formed up northwest of ginchy in two lines, facing 
northeast. nos. 3 and 4 companies in the first line 1 and 2 in the 
second on the right, commanded as follows 

  no. 1, lieutenant j. k. greer, m.c. 
  no. 2, captain r. rankin. 
  no. 3, captain c. pease. 
  no. 4, captain p. s. longinnes. 

captain l. r. hargreaves, lieutenants the hon. p. j. ogilvy, and 
r. rodakowski, 2nd lieutenant t. c. gibson, and c.s.m. voyles and 
farrell were left in reserve. lieutenant l. c. whitefoord and his 
section of the brigade machinegun company was attached to the 
battalion. 

illustration 

  the somme 
  first battalion 
  1916191z1918 

  emery walker ltd. del. et sc. 

printed in great britain by emery walker ltd., london 

they waited the hour and occupied themselves, many times over, with 
trivial details, repetitions of orders and comparisons of watches and 
compasses. their compassbearing, by the way, was n. 3z, or within 
a shade of north northeast. every one noticed that every one else 
fussed a little, and rather resented it. the doctor and the priest 
seemed to loom unnaturally large, and the sergeants were busier than 
was necessary over shortcomings, till ten minutes or so before zero, 
father browne, who had given absolution, spoke to the companies 
one by one as they knelt before him, their bayonets fixed and the 
searching dawnlight on their faces. he reminded them that that day 
was one set apart to our lady, and, ere many minutes, not few of them 
would be presenting their homage to her in person. they realised that 
he told no more than truth. 

through some accident, zero had been a little mistimed, and the 
troops left their lairs, not under the roar and swish of their own 
barrage, but in a silence which lasted perhaps less than a minute, 
but which seemed endless. they felt, one man averred, like amateur 
actors upon whom the curtain unexpectedly rises. the enemy, not 
looking for the attack, were only expending occasional shots, which 
emphasised the awful loneliness and exposure of it all, till, with 
a wrench that jerked the ground, our barrage opened, the enemys 
counterbarrage, replied, and through a haze of flying dirt no. 1 
company of the irish saw a platoon of coldstream in front of them 
crumped out of existence in one flash and roar. after that, the 
lines moved into a blizzard of shell and machinegun fire where all 
landmarks were indistinguishable in the upheaval of explosives. we 
might as well have tried to guide ourselves by the waves of the 
seathe way they spouted up. 

there naturally cannot be any definite or accurate record of the 
days work. even had maps been issued to the officers a week, instead 
of a day or so, before the attack even had those maps marked all 
known dangerpointssuch as the ginchyflers sunk road even had 
the kaleidoscopic instructions about the brown and yellow lines been 
more intelligible, or had the village of ginchy been distinguishable 
from a map of the pitted moononce the affair was launched, there 
was little chance of seeing far or living long. the two leading 
platoons of no. 3 company following the coldstream, charged, through 
the ripping fire that came out of ginchy orchard, to the german 
firstline trench which ran from the sunken road at that point. 
the others came behind them, cheering their way into the sleet of 
machinegun fire. the true line of advance was northeasterly, but 
the 2nd guards brigade on the right of the 1st, caught very heavily 
by the german barrage on their right flank, closed in towards the 
1st brigade and edged it more northward so that, about an hour and 
a half after the advance began, what the countless machineguns had 
left of the irish found itself with three out of its four company 
commanders already casualties, all officers of no. 2 company out 
of action, and the second in command, major t. m. d. bailie, 
killed. they were held up under heavy shelling, either in front 
of german wire, or, approximately, on the firstline objectivea 
battered german trench, which our artillery had done its best to 
obliterate, but fortunately had failed in parts. with the irish were 
representatives of every unit of the 1st and 2nd brigades, mostly 
lacking officers, and some fresh troops of the fourteenth division 
from the left of the line. outside their area, the sixth divisions 
attacks between ginchy telegraph and leuze wood had failed, thanks to 
a driving fire from the quadrilateral, the great fortified work that 
controlled the landscape for a mile and a half so the right flank of 
the guards division was left in the air, the enemy zealously trying 
to turn itbomb versus bayonet. 

judgment of time and distance had gone with the stress and roar 
around. the two attacking battalions 2nd and 3rd coldstream of the 
1st brigade had more or less gone toowere either dead or dispersed 
into small parties, dodging among smoking shellholes. the others 
were under the impression that they had won at least two of the 
three objectivesan error due to the fact that they had found and 
fought over a trench full of enemy where no such obstacle had been 
indicated. suddenly a party of snipers and machineguns appeared 
behind the irish in a communicationtrench, fired at large, as much 
out of bewilderment as design, wounded the sole surviving company 
officer of the four companies lieutenant j. k. greer, and owing 
to the jamming of our lewisguns got away to be killed elsewhere. a 
mass of surrendering germans, disturbed by the advance of a division 
on the left, drifted across them and further blinded the situation. 
nobody knew within hundreds of yards where they were, but since it 
was obvious that the whole attack of the division, pressed, after the 
failure of the sixth division, by the fire from the quadrilateral, 
had sheered too far towards the left or north, the need of the moment 
was to shift the men of the 2nd guards brigade back along the trench 
towards their own area to sort out the mixed mass of officerless men 
on the left and to make them dig in before the vicious, spasmodic 
shelling of the congested line turned into the full roll of the 
german barrage. 

they cleared out, as best they could, the mixed english and german 
bodies that paved the bottom of the trench, and toiled desperately 
at the wreckagesplinters and concrete from blownin dugouts, 
earthslides and collapses of headcover by yards at a time, all 
mingled or besmeared with horrors and filth that a shell would 
suddenly increase under their hands. men could give hideous isolated 
experiences of their ownit seemed to each survivor that he had 
worked for a lifetime in a world apartbut no man could recall 
any connected order of events, and the exact hour and surroundings 
wherein such and such a manprivate, n.c.o., or officermet his 
death are still in dispute. it was a still day, and the reeking, 
chemicaltainted fog of the high explosives would not clear. orders 
would be given and taken by men suddenly appearing and as suddenly 
vanishing through smoke or across fallen earth, till both would 
be cut off in the middle by a rifle bullet, or beaten down by the 
stamp and vomit of a shell. there was, too, always a crowd of men 
seated or in fantastic attitudes, silent, with set absorbed faces, 
busily engaged in trying to tie up, staunch, or plug their own 
woundsto save their own single lives with their own hands. when 
orders came to these they would shake their heads impatiently and go 
on with their urgent, horrible business. others, beyond hope, but 
not consciousness, lamented themselves into death. the diary covers 
these experiences of the three hours between 8 a. m. and 11 a. m. 
with the words in the meantime, despite rather heavy shelling, a 
certain amount of consolidation was done on the trench while the 
work of reorganization was continued. in the meantime, also, some 
of the coldstream battalions, mixed with a few men of the irish 
guards, the latter commanded by lieutenant w. mumford, had rushed 
on into the wilderness beyond the trench towards the brown line, or 
what was supposed to be the brown line, three hundred yards or so 
ahead, and for the moment had been lost. about halfpast eleven the 
commanding officer, the adjutant, and 2nd lieutenant g. v. williams 
and lieutenant l. c. whitefoord of the 1st guards brigade machinegun 
company, who represented all that was left of the officers, went 
forward with all that was left of the irish guards and all available, 
not too badly wounded coldstreamers, towards the next objective. 
every one was glad to step out from the sickening trench into the 
wiretrapped, shellploughed open whence the worst of the german 
barrage had lifted, though enemy machineguns were cropping it 
irregularly. their road lay uphill through a field of rank, unweeded 
stuff, and, when they had topped a little rise, they saw what seemed, 
by comparison, untouched country where houses had some roofs on them 
and trees some branches, all laid out ahead, in the hot sunshine 
between flers and lesbufs. there were figures in the landscape 
toogermans on the move with batteries and transportan enemy in 
sight at last and, by the look of them, moving away. then a german 
fieldbattery, also in the open, pulled up and methodically shelled 
them. they came upon a shallow trench littered with wreckage, 
scraped themselves in, and there found some more of the division, 
while the german battery continued to find them. in the long run, 
that trench, which had been a german coveredway for guns, came 
to hold about sixty of the 1st irish guards, thirty of the 2nd 
grenadiers under captain a. f. s. cunningham, and a hundred or so of 
both battalions coldstream under colonel j. v. campbell, the senior 
officer present. somewhere on the left front of it, fifteen of the 
irish were found lying out in shellholes under c. s. m. carton and 
sergeant riordan. they were in touch, so far as touch existed then, 
with the 9th rifle brigade on their left, but it was not advisable to 
show ones head above a shellhole on account of enemy machineguns 
which were vividly in touch with everything that moved. their right 
was all in the air, and for the second time no one knewno one could 
knowwhere the trench in which they lay was situated in the existing 
chaos. they fixed its position at last by compassbearings. it was 
more or less on the line of the second objective, and had therefore 
to be held in spite of casualties. the men could do no more than 
fire when possible at anything that showed itself which was seldom 
and, in the rare intervals when shelling slackened, work themselves 
a little further into the ground. at this juncture, captain l. r. 
hargreaves, left behind with the reserve of officers in trnes wood, 
was ordered up, and reached the line with nothing worse than one 
wound. he led out a mixed party of coldstream and irish to a chain 
of disconnected shellholes a few hundred yards in advance of the 
trench. here they suffered for the rest of the afternoon under the 
fieldbattery shelling them at less than half a mile, and the regular 
scything of the machineguns from the quadrilateral on their right. 
a machinegun detachment, under lieutenant l. c. whitefoord, went 
with them, and lieutenant w. c. mumford and 2nd lieutenant f. s. l. 
smith with their little detachments of irish and coldstream came up 
later as reinforcements. that scattered forward fringe among the 
shellholes gave what help it could to the trench behind it, which 
filled up, as the day wore on, with more irish and coldstream working 
their way forward. formation was goneblown to bits long ago. nearly 
every officer was down, and sergeant after sergeant succeeding to 
the command, had dropped too but the discipline held, and with it 
the instinct that made them crawl, dodge, run and stumble as chance 
offered and their corporals ordered, towards the enemy and not away 
from him. they had done so, at first, shouting aloud in the massed 
rush of the full charge that now seemed centuries away in time, and 
worlds in space. later, as they were scattered and broken by fire, 
knowing that their battalion was cut to pieces, they worked with a 
certain automatic forlorn earnestness, which, had any one had time to 
think, was extremely comic. for instance, when a sergeant came across 
a stray private meditating longer than seemed necessary at the bottom 
of a tootempting shellhole, he asked him gravely what he thought he 
was doing. the man, dazed and shaken, replied with an equal gravity 
that he did not know. then, said the sergeant, get on forward out 
o this an maybe yell find out, and smote him dispassionately 
with the flat of a spade. the man, without a word, rose up, lifted 
his head once more into the bullettorn air, and pitched forward, 
dead, a few paces farther on. and, at one time, in a terrible waiting 
pause, when it was death to show a finger, they saw one man out on 
the flank suddenly taken by madness. he lifted himself up slowly, 
and as slowly marched across the open towards the enemy, firing his 
rifle in the air meantime. the bullets seemed to avoid him for a long 
while till he was visibly jerked off his feet by several that struck 
him altogether. the stiff, blind deathmarch ended, and the watching 
irish clicked their tongues for wonder and pity. 

the battalion had had no communication with brigade headquarters 
or any one else since early morning. it lacked supports, lights, 
signals, information, wood, wire, sandbags, water, food and at 
least fifty per cent. of its strength. its last machinegun had 
been knocked out, and it had no idea what troops might be next on 
either side. as the sun went down, word came from the advanced 
party in the shellholes where the wrecked machinegun lay, that 
the germans were massing for a counterattack on the blue line of 
what had been the third objective. they could be seen in artillery 
formation with a mass of transport behind them, and it passed the 
mens comprehension why they did not come on and finish the weary 
game. but the enemy chose to wait, and at the edge of dusk the irish 
saw the 2nd scots guards attacking on their right through a barrage 
of heavy stuffattacking and disappearing between the shellbursts. 
the attack failed a few of the scots guards came back and found 
places beside the irish and coldstream in the trench. night fell 
the enemys counterattack held off the survivors of the advanced 
party in the shellholes were withdrawn to help strengthen the main 
trench and when it was dark, men were sent out to get into touch 
with the flanks. they reported, at last, a battalion of the duke of 
cornwalls on their left and the 2nd grenadiers on their right. in 
the protecting darkness, too, water and rations arrived from the 
ginchylesbufs road, by some unconsidered miraclework of captain 
antrobus and the other battalion transport officers and throughout 
the very long night, stragglers and little cutoff parties, with 
their wounded, found the trench, reported, fed, and flung themselves 
down in whatever place was least walked overto sleep like the dead, 
their neighbours. groundflares had at last indicated the battalions 
position to our nightscouting contact aeroplanes. there was nothing 
more to be done exceptas one survivor put itwe was busy thryin 
to keep alive against the next day. 

the dawn of september 16 pinned them strictly to their cramped 
position, for the slope behind them ran in full view of the enemy. 
moreover, enemy aeroplanes had risen early and taken good stock 
of the crowded shallow trench where they lay and in due time the 
enemy artillery began to scourge them. but some of our batteries had 
moved up in the night, and one little fieldbattery that the irish 
thought very kindly of all that day, distracted their tormentors, so 
that, though they were shelled with h.e. and shrapnel as a matter 
of principle from dawn to dark, they could still make shift to hang 
on. the only orders they received from the brigade that day were 
to maintain their positions and stand by to support an attack by 
the 3rd brigade. that attack, however, never was launched. they 
lay still and watched, between bursts of shelling, a battalion on 
their left attacking some german trenches south of gueudecourt. 
this happened once in the morning and once in the afternoon. small 
stooping or crawling figures crept out for a while over the face 
of the landscape, drew the german guns, including those that were 
shelling the irish trench, upon their advance, wavered forward 
into the smoke of it, spread out and disappearedprecisely as the 
watching guards themselves had done the day before. the impression 
of unreality was as strong as in a cinemashow. nothing seemed to 
happen that made any difference. small shapes gesticulated a little, 
lay down and got up again, or having lain down, rose no more. then 
the german guns returned to bombarding the brownline trench, and 
the men lying closer realised that the limelight of the show had 
shifted and was turned mercilessly upon themselves again. all they 
wanted was reliefrelief from the noises and the stenches of the 
high explosives, the clinging horror of the sights nearest them 
and from the tension that lay at the back of the minds of the most 
unimaginative. the men were dumbtired with mere work and suffering 
the few officers doubly tired out by that and the responsibility 
of keeping awake and thinking consecutively, even when their words 
of command clotted on their tongues through shear weariness. the 
odds were heavily in favour of a german attack after dark and a 
written warning from the rear said it would certainly come in the 
course of the night. a party of explorers sent to look for defences, 
found some sections of barbwire on trestles in the wreck of an 
enemytrench behind them. it was manhandled and brought away by 
lengths and, in some fashion, set up before the trench so that the 
enemy might not actually stroll over them without warning. 

fresh rumours of german counterattacks arrived after midnight, in 
the way that information blows back and forth across a battlefield 
in reaction. the men were once more rousedin a burst of chill 
rainto strengthen the outpost line. they must have made some 
noise about it, being more than half asleep at the time, but the 
enemy, so far from attacking, opened with longrange smallarm fire 
and sent up a myriad lights. that riot died down at last, and when 
the battalions third dawn in the line had well broken, a company 
of lincolns from the 62nd brigade came up to the trench, and said 
their orders were to relieve. the light was full enough now to 
reveal them very clearly, and a rapid relief was effected with some 
difficulty. the enemy shelled till they reached the shelter of the 
ridge behind and there, at last, drew clear of the immediate aspect 
of war. other scattered parties of the battalion, with little knots 
of lightly wounded men, joined them on their way to the southern 
edge of bernafay wood, where they took reckoning of their losses. 
they had still seven officers left, including 2nd lieutenant t. f. 
macmahon, who with some forty men had been left behind in divisional 
reserve on the 16th, and the whole of the working platoon which had 
not been in action rejoined the battalion practically intact. the 
working platoon, which was made up of two men from each platoon was 
popularly credited with fabricating headquarters dugouts at enormous 
distances from the firingline and was treated rather as a jest by 
men not lucky enough to be drawn for it. as for the rest, major t. m. 
bailie, lieutenant c. r. tisdall, lieutenant l. c. whitefoord, and 
2nd lieutenant n. butler were killed. captain c. pease and lieutenant 
j. k. greer died of wounds. captain p. s. longinnes, captain r. 
rankin, lieutenant a. c. w. innes, 2nd lieutenants h. c. holmes, t. 
butlerstoney and count j. e. de salis were wounded and there were 
over 330 casualties in the other ranks. the total casualties in the 
brigade were 1zz6. 

no one seems to recall accurately the order of events between the 
gathering in bernafay wood and the arrival of the shadow of the 
battalion in camp at the citadel. the sun was shining breakfast was 
ready for the officers and men near some trees. it struck their very 
tired apprehensions that there was an enormous amount of equipage and 
service for a very few men, and they noticed dully a sudden hustling 
off of unneeded plates and cups. they felt as though they had 
returned to a world which had outgrown them on a somewhat terrifying 
scale during all the ages that they had been away from it. their one 
need, after food eaten sitting, was rest, and, when the first stupor 
of exhaustion was satisfied, their sleep began to be broken by dreams 
only less horrible than the memories to which they waked. 


september 25 

but the cure was ready to hand. on the evening of the 18th september, 
in wet and cold weather, the brigadier sent the battalion a letter of 
praise and prophecy 

  as your brigadier i wish to express my feelings as to your most 
  gallant work on the 15th september 1916 in the operations at 
  ginchy. the advance from the orchard in the face of machinegun 
  fire is equal to anything you have yet accomplished in this 
  campaign, and once more the 1st battalion irish guards has carried 
  out a most magnificent advance and held ground gained in spite 
  of the most severe losses. in this, your first campaign, you are 
  upholding the highest standard of bravery and efficiency for your 
  successors and more praise than that i cannot give you. you may be 
  called upon in the very near future to carry out similar work and 
  i know you will not fail. 

  sd. c. e. pereira, 
  brigadiergeneral, 
  commanding 1st guards brigade. 

this meant that they would be moved again as soon as they could stand 
up, and would go into their next action with at least 50 per cent. 
new drafts and half their proper allowance of officers. indeed, they 
were warned, next day, with the rest of their division for further 
operations in the immediate future, and the work of remaking and 
reequipping the battalion from end to end, saved them from that 
ghastly state of body and soul which is known as fighting huns in 
your sleep. 

on the 19th, major t. m. d. bailies body was brought back from the 
front and buried in the cemetery in the centre of the camp at carnoy, 
and on the same day lord cavan, commanding the corps, rode over and 
spoke to the officers on horseback of the progress of the campaign, 
of what had so far been accomplished on the somme, what was intended 
for the future, and specially, as bearing on their next battle, of 
what their artillery had in store for the enemy. it was a simple, 
unadorned speech, the substance of which he repeated to the n.c.o.s, 
then wished the gentlemen of his majestys foot guards all good 
fortune and rode away. 

the division had expected to be used again as soon as might be, but 
their recent losses were so heavy that every battalion in it was 
speculating beneath its breath how their new drafts would shape. it 
is one thing to take in men by fifties at a time and weld them slowly 
in the salient to a common endurance it is quite another to launch a 
battalion, more than half untried recruits, across the open against 
all that organized death can deliver. this was a time that again 
tested the depot and reserve battalion whose neverending work all 
fighting battalions take for granted, or mention only to blame. but 
warley and caterham had not failed them. over three hundred recruits 
were sent up immediately after the 15th and 16th, and on the 20th 
september the remade battalion, less than six hundred strong, with 
ten officers, marched out of citadel camp to its detestable trenches 
on ginchy ridge. the two coldstream battalions of the 1st brigade 
held the front line there the 2nd grenadiers in reserve, and the 
1st irish guards in support. 

the ground was not yet a sea of mud, but quite sufficiently 
tenacious. the area allotted was old trenches and newish 
shellholes with water at the bottom, in the small rectangular wood 
east of trnes wood. they were employed for three or four days in 
cleaning up the litter of battle all about the slopes and piling it 
in dumps, while the enemy shelled them more or less regularly with 
large black 5.9 shellsa very fair test of the new drafts nerves. 
the stuff would drop unheralded through the then leafy woods, and 
explode at large among the shelters and slits that the men had made 
for themselves. they took the noise and the shaking with philosophy 
as their n.c.o.s testified. there was some wondherin in the new 
drafts, but no budgin, yell understand. 

reading between lines one can see that the r.c. priest, the reverend 
father f. m. browne, was busy in those days on spiritual affairs, for 
he was hit in the face on the 23rd, while visiting a neighbouring 
battery, so that mass on the 24ththe day before their second 
battle of the sommewas celebrated by the reverend father casey. 
they were shelled, too, that sunday in the wood, a single unlucky 
shell killing two men and wounding thirteen. the last available 
officer from the base, lieutenant a. h. blom, had joined the night 
before all drafts were in the ground was assumed to be walkable 
which was not the case, and about 9 p. m. of a pitchblack sunday 
night the battalion left the wood and reached its assemblytrench, 
an extraordinary bad and unprotected one, about midnight. they were 
promiscuously shelled in the darkness, and the trench, when found, 
was so narrow that they had to stand on the edge of it till the 
battalion that they relievedit did not keep them waiting longgot 
out. no. 1 company captain l. r. hargreaves, no. 2 company captain 
the hon. p. j. ogilvy were in the front line, the latter on the 
right, no. 3 company lieutenant a. h. blom, and no. 4 company 
captain rodakowski about 150 yards behind with the battalion 
headquarters, in a diagonal communicationtrench well bottomed with 
water. second lieutenant t. c. gibson was wounded on the way up, and 
was replaced by 2nd lieutenant t. f. macmahon who had been left in 
regimental reserve. 

the idea of the days work for the 25th was less ambitious than 
on the 15th, and the objectives were visible german trenches, not 
imaginary lines on uniformly indistinguishable landscapes. here is 
the brigademajors memorandum for the 1st brigade on the lie of the 
land, issued on the 22nd september they were to attack and carry 
the village of lesbufs, up the ginchylesbufs road, about fifteen 
hundred yards, on a front, again, of five hundred yards the irish 
guards leading the attack throughout on the left of the 1st brigade, 
and the 2nd grenadiers on the right. it was in essence the clearing 
out of a badly shaken enemy line by the help of exceedingly heavy 
barrages. 

  1st guards brigade no. 262 

  the forthcoming attack differs from the last in that the whole 
  scheme is not such an ambitious one. the distance to the first 
  objective is about 300 yards, to the second objective 800 yards, 
  and to the last objective about 1300 yards. in each case the 
  objective is a clearly defined one, and not merely a line drawn 
  across the map. 

  between our present front line and the first objective there is 
  only no mans land. during the next two nights this should be 
  actively patrolled to ensure that our attack is not taken by 
  surprise by some unknown trench, and in order that officers and 
  n.c.o.s may have a knowledge of the ground. 

  it would also be of great assistance to the artillery if reports as 
  to the actual distance to the green line were sent in. 

  the ground slopes down to lesbufs, beyond which there is a 
  distinct hollow with a plateau the same level as lesbufs beyond. 
  on reaching the final objective officers and n.c.o.s should 
  understand the necessity for pushing patrols out to command this 
  hollow and give warning or prevent counterattacks forming up here. 

  large scale maps of lesbufs have been sent to all battalions. 
  these should be carefully studied by all officers and n.c.o.s, 
  and especially by those of the companies detailed for the cleaning 
  up of lesbufs. 

  all runners and signallers should know the position of the advanced 
  brigade report centre, and that the best means of approach to it 
  will probably be down the communicationtrench t.3.c and t.8.b. 

  finally, it cannot be too much impressed on assaulting troops the 
  necessity for clinging to our own barrage. it will be an attack in 
  which this should be comparatively easy, and on which the success 
  of the whole operation may depend. 

  sd. m. b. smith, captain, 
  brigademajor, 
  1st guards brigade. 

  september 22, 1916. 

the battalions own task was to clear the three objectives laid down, 
supported by the 3rd coldstream, to clean out the northern portion 
of lesbufs village, and above all to secure their flanks when they 
halted or were held up. they waited in their trenches while our guns, 
hour after hour, sluiced the roads they were to take with an even 
downpour of shell along the trenches to be attackedover lesbufs 
and its hidden defences, and far out into the untouched farming land 
beyond. it was a fine sunny morning that hid nothing at 12.35 our 
barrage locked down two hundred yards ahead of the troops, and nos. 1 
and 2 companies moved out with the rest of the line towards the first 
german trench three hundred yards away. the enemy put down a barrage 
at once on our frontsupport and communicationtrenches, which caused 
a good many casualties including captain r. j. p. rodakowski and 
the doctor in nos. 3 and 4 companies who were moving up as a second 
wave. eventually, these companies found it less hampering to leave 
the crowded trench and come out over the open. so far, our artillery 
work was altogether a better business than on the 15th. the companies 
moved almost leisurely behind the roaring archoftriumph of the 
barrage, till the leading line reached the first trench with its 
halffinished dugouts. here they found only dazed german survivors 
begging to be taken out of that inferno to the nearest prisoners 
kraal. some of these captures, officers included, sincerely expected 
to be slaughtered in cold blood. 

the 2nd grenadiers, on the right of the 1st irish guards, had been 
unlucky in their position, for the wire in front of their sector 
being veiled by high crop, our guns had missed it. that battalion 
suffered heavily in officers and men, shot down as they tried to work 
their way through by hand but they never lost touch, and the advance 
went on unbrokenly to the next pointa sunken road on the east side 
of lesbufs, five hundred yards ahead of the first objective. all 
four companies of the irish were together nowlieutenant blom of 
no. 3 had been wounded at the first trench and 2nd lieutenant t. 
f. macmahon took over. they reached the downward slope to the sunk 
road and, as at the first objective, found most of their work had 
been done for them by the barrage. even while they congratulated 
themselves and sent off a pigeon, as well as runner messages, to 
report the capture to battalion headquarters, which, somewhat 
broken by the german shelling, had arrived in the firsttaken 
trench, fire fell on them from the south. our own guns, misranging 
across the fields, were supposed to be responsible for this and a 
second pigeon was despatched praying them to cease, but there were a 
number of casualties before the advance to the last objective began. 
this was shown on the map as just east of lesbufs village, and east 
again of another sunken road. the final surge forward included a 
rush across uprooted orchards and through wrecked houses, shops, and 
barns, with buildings alight or confusedly collapsing round them, and 
the enemy streaming out ahead to hide in shellholes in the open. 
there was not much killing at this point, and, thanks to the tanks 
and the guns, a good deal less machinegun fire than might have been 
expected. the battalion dug in in a potato field a few hundred yards 
beyond the village, where the men providently laid aside the largest 
potatoes for supper, if so be they should live till that meal. in 
the meantime our guns were punching holes into the open land behind 
lesbufs, where parties of dislodged enemy had taken shelter. these 
preferred, at last, to bolt back through that storm and surrender to 
our men digging, who received them with derisive cheersfor all the 
world as though they had been hares in a beat. 

then came the tragedy. our barrage, for some reason or other, wavered 
and stopped almost on the line where the men were digging in, and 
there hung for a long whilesome accounts say a quarter of an hour, 
others two hours. at any rate, it was long enough to account for many 
more casualties. captain l. r. hargreaves, who had fought wounded 
through the 15th, was here so severely wounded that he died while 
being carried back, and captain drurylowe of the kings company of 
the 1st grenadiers, digging in on the irish left, was killedboth 
casualties by one shell. the 2nd grenadiers, all company officers 
down, were in touch on the right, but the left was still doubtful, 
for the attack there had been held up at gueudecourt village, and 
the 3rd guards brigade had to make a defensive flank there, while a 
company of the 3rd coldstream was moved up to help in the work. 

in modern war no victory appears till the end of all, and what 
is gained by immense bloodshed must be held by immense physical 
labour of consolidation, which gives the enemy time to recover 
and counterattack in his turn. the irish dug and deepened and 
strengthened their line north of lesbufs, while the enemy shelled 
them till afternoon, when there was a breathing space. a german 
counterattack, on the left of the guards division, was launched 
and forthwith burned up. the shelling was resumed till night, which 
suddenly fell so quiet, by somme standards, that supplies could 
be brought up without too much difficulty. as soon as light for 
ranging came on the 26th, our men were shelled to ground again and 
an attempt of three patrols to get forward and establish posts of 
command on a nearby ridge brought them into a nest of machineguns 
and snipers. the diary remarks that the patrols located at least one 
machinegun, which is probably a large understatement for so soon 
as the german machinegunners recovered breath and eyesight, after or 
between shells, they were up and back and at work again. by the rude 
arithmetic of the ranks in those days, three machineguns equalled a 
company, and, when well posted, a battalion. 

the battalion was relieved on the evening of the 26th by its sister 
the 2nd battalion, who took over the whole of lesbufs ruins from 
the brigade and the 1st irish guards went back with the others 
through bernafay wood, where they fed, to camp once more at the 
citadel. 

in the two days of their second somme battle, which they entered 
less than six hundred strong and ten officers, they had lost one 
officer, captain hargreaves, died of wounds, and five wounded, and 
more than 250 casualties in other ranks. add these to the casualties 
of the 15th, and it will be seen that in ten days the battalion 
had practically lost a battalion. the commanding officer, colonel 
mccalmont, the adjutant, captain gordon, and lieutenant smith were 
the only officers who had come unwounded through both actions. 

general pereira, commanding the 1st guards brigade, issued the 
following order on the 2zth september 

  you have again maintained the high traditions of the 1st guards 
  brigade when called upon a second time in the battle of the somme. 
  for five days previous to the assault the 2nd and 3rd battalion 
  coldstream guards held the trenches under constant heavy shellfire 
  and dug many hundred yards of assembly and communicationtrenches, 
  this work being constantly interrupted by the enemys artillery. 
  the 2nd battalion grenadier guards and the 1st battalion irish 
  guards, though under shellfire in their bivouacs, were kept clear 
  of the trenches until the evening of 24th september, and were given 
  the task of carrying by assault all the objectives to be carried by 
  this brigade. nothing deterred them in this attack, not even the 
  fact that in places the enemy wire was cut in the face of rifle 
  and machinegun fire, and in spite of all resistance and heavy 
  losses the entire main enemy defensive line was captured. 

  every battalion in the brigade carried out its task to the full. 

  the german reserve division, which includes the 238th, 239th, and 
  240th regiments, and which opposed you for many weeks at ypres, 
  left the salient on the 18th september. you have now met them in 
  the open, a worthy foe, but you have filled their trenches with 
  their dead and have driven them before you in headlong flight. 

  i cannot say how proud i am to have had the honour of commanding 
  the 1st guards brigade in this battle, a brigade which has proved 
  itself to be the finest in the british army. 

  the brigade is now under orders for rest and training, and it must 
  now be our object to keep up the high standard of efficiency, and 
  those who have come to fill our depleted ranks will strive their 
  utmost to fill worthily the place of those gallant officers and men 
  who have laid down their lives for a great cause. 

  sd. c. e. pereira, 
  brigadiergeneral, 
  commanding 1st guards brigade. 

  september 28, 1916. 

lord cavan had sent the following message to general pereira 

  hearty thanks and sincere congratulation to you all. a very fine 
  achievement splendidly executed. 

to which the brigadier had replied 

  your old brigade very proud to be able to present you with 
  lesbufs. all ranks most gratified by your kind congratulations. 

and so that little wave among many waves, which had done its work 
and gained its few hundred yards of ground up the beach, drew back 
into the ocean of men and hutments below the slopes of the somme. 
the new drafts were naturally rather pleased with themselves their 
n.c.o.s were reasonably satisfied with them, and the remnant of the 
officers were far too busy with reorganization and reequipment 
to have distinct notions on any subject except the days work. it 
was a little later that heroisms or horrors, seen out of the tail 
of the eye in action, and unrealised at the time, became alive as 
rest returned to the body and men compared dreams with each other, 
or argued in what precise manner such and such a comrade had died. 
there was bravery enough and to spare on all hands, and there were 
a few, but not too many, decorations awarded for it in the course 
of the next month. the battalion took the bravery for granted, and 
the credit of the aggregate went to the battalion. they looked at 
it, broadly speaking, thus there was times when yell understand 
if a man was not earnin v.c.s for hours on end he would not keep 
alivean even then, unless the saints looked after him, hed 
likely be killed in the middest of it. in other words, the average 
of bravery required in action had risen twentyfold, even as the 
average of shots delivered by machineguns exceeds that of many 
rifles and by the mercy of heaven, as the irish themselves saw it, 
the spirit of man under discipline had risen to those heights. 

captain l. r. hargreaves killed on the 25th and captain p. s. 
longinnes wounded, with lieutenant g. v. williams who was knocked 
unconscious and nearly killed by shellfire on the 25th, were given 
the military cross for the affair of the 15th. drillsergeant moran, 
a pillar of the battalion, who had died of wounds it was he who 
had asked the immortal question about this retreat at mons, with 
private boyd, received the d.c.m., and sergeant riordan wounded 
and reported missing the bar to the same medal. lancecorporal j. 
carroll, privates m. kenny, j. oconnor, j. white and lancecorporal 
cousins had the military medalall for the 15th. 

for the 15th and 25th combined, lieutenant walter mumford and 2nd 
lieutenant t. f. macmahon won the military cross and sergeant p. 
doolan and private g. taylor the military medal. 

for the 25th, temporary captain the hon. p. ogilvy received the 
military cross acting company sergeantmajor mcmullen, the bar to 
his d.c.m. and privates whearty, troy and m. lewis, the military 
medal. captain gordon, the adjutant, was recommended for an immediate 
m.c. which he received with the next new year honours at the same 
time as the c.o. received a d.s.o. 

it was not an extravagant reward for men who have to keep their heads 
under hideous circumstances and apply courage and knowledge at the 
given instant and after inconceivable strain, to hold, strengthen, 
and turn desperate situations to their platoons or companys 
advantage. the news went into warley and caterham, and soured 
drillsergeants, deadwearied with the repetitionwork of forming 
recruits to fill shellholes, found their little unnoticed reward in 
it. yes. we made emwith the rheumatism on us, an all an we 
kept on makin em till i got to hate the silly faces of em. an 
what did we get out of it? tell warley that their last draft was 
dam rabbits an the ensigns as bad. an after that, its miltry 
crosses and d.c.m.s for our dam rabbits 

the battalion returned to the days of small, detailed, important 
thingstoo wearied to appreciate compliments, and too overworked 
with breaking in fresh material to think. 

on the 2zth, 2nd lieutenant r. b. s. reford joined from the base 
on the 28th 2nd lieutenant t. f. macmahon with a party was sent to 
restcamp for a week. on the 30th captains the earl of kingston and 
h. t. a. boyse joined and took over command of nos. 1 and 3 companies. 


restcamps and fatigues 

on the 1st october, a sunday, after mass celebrated by a french 
interpreter, which did not affect the devotion of the battalion, the 
whole brigade were embarked in one hundred and forty french army 
charabancs, a new and unforeseen torment, and driven via amiens 
from fricourt to restcamp at hornoy. much must have happened on 
that pleasuretrip for the diary observes that the drivers of the 
vehicles were apparently over military age, many of the assistants 
being natives. one is left in the dark as to their countries of 
origin, but ones pity goes out to all of them, annamite, senegalese, 
or algerian, who helped to convey the newly released irish for eight 
hours over fifty jolting miles. the battalion found good billets for 
themselves, and the brigade machinegun company in hornoy itself, 
where the inhabitants showed them no small kindness. owing to small 
numbers, officers were in one mess, says the diary, and one can see 
the expansion of that small and shrunken company as the new drafts 
come in and training picks up again. 

on the 3rd october, 2nd lieutenants j. j. fitzwilliam murphy and j. 
n. nash joined on the 4th the reverend p. j. lanefox joined for 
duty on the 5th, 2nd lieutenant the hon. d. obrien came in sick 
with the draft of a hundred and fiftytwo and went down sick, all 
within fortyeight hours, his draft punctually delivered. major the 
hon. t. vesey also joined as second in command during the course of 
this month. 

they paraded on the 5th october for the divisional commander, 
majorgeneral feilding, who presented the ribbons to the n.c.o.s and 
men who had been awarded medals and complimented the battalion on 
its past work. second lieutenant e. budd and five other ranks, 2nd 
lieutenant e. m. harvey, with a draft of ninetyfive, not counting 
eleven more who had joined in small parties, and 2nd lieutenants 
a. l. bain, h. h. maxwell, and j. j. kane all came in within the 
next ten days. captain r. g. c. yerburgh, on rejoining from the 
central training school at havre, was posted to the command of no. 4 
company and on the 8th october, a team, chiefly officers, greatly 
daring, played a rugby football match against a neighbouring 
french recruit battalion, which campaign seems to have so inspired 
them that they all attended a divisional dinner that night at 1st 
brigade headquarters at dromesnil. there is, alas no record of that 
match nor of what the french recruit battalion thought of it but 
just before their departure from hornoy they played a soccer match 
against the 26th french infantry, and next day the c.o. and all 
company officers rode over to that regiment to see how it practised 
the latest form of attack over the open. thus did they combine 
instruction with amusement, and cemented the sacred alliance 

they dined also with their own 2nd battalion, who were billeted 
five miles awaya high and important function at hornoy where 
brigadiergeneral butler, formerly in command of the 2nd battalion, 
was present, with all the officers of both battalions. the band of 
the welsh guards assisted and they all drank the health, among many 
others, of the belle of hornoy, who responded with enthusiasm. 
further, they played a football match against their brethren and won 
entertained the village, not forgetting the 26th french infantry, 
with their drums drove all ranks hard at company drills and 
battalion attacks rehearsed the review for the approaching visit of 
h.r.h. the duke of connaught, and welcomed small detachments as they 
came in. the last was 2nd lieutenant d. a. b. moodie with 50, on the 
26th october, when lieutenant h. f. s. law rejoined the battalion 
from his intelligence duties with the ninth corps. drillsergeant j. 
orr assumed the duties of 2nd lieutenant from november 2. 

the mess was now full again. the dead of the september somme had 
almost passed out of mens memories till the war should be over 
and the ghosts return and the battalion, immortal however much it 
changes, was ready forty over strength for the bitter winter of 
161z. 

on the zth november they were warned to move back into line and 
celebrated it by an officers dinner thirtyseven strong of both 
battalions at the hotel london, hornoy. 

on the 10th they regretfully quitted that hospitable village for 
the too familiar camping grounds near carnoy beyond maulte, which 
in winter becomes a marsh on the least provocation. they were 
accommodated in belltents in a sea of mud with weather to match. 

next day 11th november they shifted to a sort of camp near 
montauban, quite inadequate and served by bottomless roads where 
they were shelled a little after massa proof, one presumes, that 
the enemy had news of their arrival. 

on the 13th november, in cold but dry weather, they took over a line 
of trench north of lesbufs between that village and gueudecourt. 
these were reached by interminable duckboards from trnes wood 
and up over the battered and hacked flers ridge. there were no 
communicationtrenches and, in that windy waste of dead weed and 
wreckage, no landmarks to guide the eye. trench equipment was 
utterly lacking, and every stick and strand had to be manhandled 
up from ginchy. in these delectable lodgings they relieved the zth 
yorkshires and the 8th south staffordshires, losing one man wounded 
by shellfire, and major the hon. t. e. vesey was sent down sick as 
the result of old wounds received at loos and in 14. the somme was 
no place for such as were not absolutely fit, and even the fittest 
had to pay toll. 

shelling for the next three days was continuous but 
indiscriminate. four men were killed, fourteen wounded, and three 
disappearedwalked, it is supposed, into enemy ground. the wonder 
was there were not more such accidents. wiser men than they would 
come up to the front line with a message, refuse the services of 
a guide back because, they protested, they knew every inch of the 
ground andwould be no more seen till exhumation parties three or 
four years later identified them by some rag of guards khaki or a 
button. 

the battalion was relieved by the 2nd grenadiers at midnight 16th 
november, but were not clear till morning, when they crawled back to 
camp between carnoy and montauban, packed forty men apiece into the 
icychill nissen huts, supposed to hold thirty, and were thankful for 
the foul warmth of them. thence they moved into unstable tents on 
the outskirts of maulte, on the bray road, where the wind funnels 
from all parts of the compass, and in alternate snow, rain, and snow 
again, plumbed the deeps of discomfort. when frost put a crust on the 
ground they drilled when it broke they cleaned themselves from mud 
and, fair or foul, did their best to improve any camp into which 
fortune decanted them. 

it was a test, were one needed, that proved all ranks to the 
uttermost. the heroism that endures for a day or a week at high 
tension is a small thing beside that habit of mind which can hold 
fast to manner, justice, honour and a show of kindliness and 
toleration, in despite of physical misery and the slow passage 
of bleak and indistinguishable days. character and personality, 
whatever its crimesheet may have been, was worth its weight in 
gold on the somme, where a jest counted as high as a rumration. 
all sorts of unsuspected people came to their own as leaders of men 
or lighteners of care. there were stretcherbearers, for instance, 
whose mere presence and personality steadied half a platoon after the 
shellburst when, picking themselves up, mens first question out of 
the dark would be wheres soandso? and soandso would answer 
with the dignity of milesian kings im here caarry on, lads 

so, too, with the officers. in the long overseeing of endless 
fatigues, which are more trying than action, they come to understand 
the men with a thoroughness that one is inclined to believe that 
not many corps have reached. discipline in the guards, as has been 
many times pointed out, allowed no excuse whatever for the officer 
or the man but once the punishment, or the telling off, had been 
administered, the sinner and the judge could, and did, discuss 
everything under heaven. one explanation which strikes at the root of 
the matter is this yell understand that in those days we was all 
countin ourselves for dead mensooner or later. twas in the air, 
yell understandlike the big stuff comin over. 

on sunday the 2zth november, the day of the requiem mass for the 
irish guards in westminster cathedral, a requiem mass was said in 
maulte church and they moved out to a french camp forked tree, 
south of the town where the big french huts held a hundred men 
apiece, but cookhouses, etc., were all to build and the usual 
routine improvement work began again. their brigade bombing officer, 
lieutenant the hon. h. p. obrien, was appointed staff captain to the 
1st guards brigade, and captain r. g. c. yerburgh left to be attached 
to the 2nd guards brigade h.q. staff for instruction in staff duties. 

they were visited by their corps and divisional commanders, inspected 
by their brigadier and routemarched till the 3rd december, when they 
moved to maltz horn camp. 

it had been decided that the british army should, by degrees, take 
over a stretch of the french line from le transloy to a point 
opposite roye and the battalions share of this was about a thousand 
yards of trench at saillysaillisel, held by the 160th regiment of 
the twentieth corps corps de fer. the front line ran a little in 
front of what had once been that long and prosperous village on 
the ridge, and, though not continuous, it held in places. the 
supportline, through, and among the wreck of the houses, was dry and 
fairly good. that there were no communicationtrenches was a small 
mattermen preferred to take their chances in the open to being 
buried in trench mudbut there was no road up to it and the going 
was heavy. 

once installed december 6, after a prompt and workmanlike french 
relief, which impressed them, they found the 156th french infantry 
on their right, a coldstream battalion on their left, and an 
enemy in front disposed to be quiet except when frightened or 
suspecting reliefs, when he would drop very unpleasant barrages on 
the supportline. 

they were relieved on the 9th december by the 2nd grenadiers who were 
late, because they were constantly delayed by digging men out of 
mud. from bois de la haie, the long, thin slip of wood under morval 
whence the relief started at a quarterpast five in the evening, the 
distance to the battalions sector might be two miles. that relief 
was not completed till halfpast one on the morning of the 10thsay 
eight hours to cover four or five miles in one continuous nightmare 
of mud, darkness, loss of touch and the sudden engulfment of heavily 
loaded men. a grenadier battalion claims to hold the record fifteen 
hours for the extrication of one man. six or eight hours was not 
uncommon. they were shelled, of course, on their arrival and lost 
sergeant wylie, killed, and eleven wounded. captain r. v. pollok 
joined from home on that day and took over command of no. 1 company, 
major e. b. greer, on loan from the 2nd battalion, who had commanded 
the battalion temporarily, handed over to captain the hon. h. r. 
alexander, d.s.o. acting c.o. in place of colonel r. mccalmont on 
leave. captain the earl of kingston had to go into hospital on the 
10thresult of an old woundand on the 13th december lieutenant 
j. j. v. f. murphyexposure. 

on the 12th december, after a days rest in a muddy camp near 
montauban, they marched to combles through the blackened site of 
guillemont to relieve the 2nd battalion on a more southerly sector, 
to furnish workingparties for the railway lines that were spreading 
stealthily north and east, to help lay down plank roadsnot the 
least burdensome of fatigues, for the planks were substantial 
logsand to make the front line a little less impossible. it was an 
easy turn, with very little shelling or sniping, both sides being 
only able to reach their front line by going over the open. when 
to this is added full moonlight and a fall of snow, moderation is 
imposed on every one till they are under cover. otherwise a local 
battle might have developedand what is the use of local battles 
where both sides are stuck in the mud, and no help can be sent to 
either? this question would be put to the staff when, from the 
comfortable security of their decent dugouts, they lectured the 
frontline, and were invited mirthfully to come up and experiment for 
themselves. 

the battalion had eleven wounded in three days, and returned to 
bronfay to find their allotted camp already filled up by gunners. 
then there was confusion and argument, and the quartermasternotable 
even among quartermastersprocured fuel and braziers and got 
the men more or less warmed and fed. the muddle, says the diary 
sternly, was due to no proper arrangements being made to find out to 
whom camp 108 belonged before the battalions were moved into them. 
thus, on paper at least, did the front line get back at the staff. 

they returned to the combles area on the 18th, relieved their 
sisterbattalion in less than three hours, and in fine frosty 
weather, helped by the enemys inactivity, improved the trenches, 
lost five killed and one wounded, and on their return found camp 108 
also improved and devoid of gunners. 

the year closed well. their christmas turn december 252z, when they 
missed their christmas dinners was almost bloodless. the reliefs 
went smoothly, and though a thaw made the trenches cave here and 
there, but four men were wounded, and in their new year turn, only 
one. 

about christmas the brigade, to their deep regret, lost their 
brigadiergeneral, c. pereirapromoted to command the second 
division, and in him, one of the best friends that they ever had. he 
knew the battalion very personally, appreciated its value, and fought 
for its interests with devotion and a strong hand. 

nothing is said in the diary of any attempts on the enemys part to 
fraternise, and the new year was seen in without any incident, 
which means that no bursts of artillery marked the hour. and on the 
3rd january the whole of the guards division went out of the line for 
refit. the twentieth division took its unenvied place, and the 1st 
battalion irish guards lay at sandpits camp near maulte. 

the strain was beginning to tell. they had had to transfer lieutenant 
f. s. l. smith and 2nd lieutenant j. kane to the 2nd battalion owing 
to shortage in that battalion on account of sickness, and their own 
coolies were in need of rest and change. the strongest cannot stand 
up beyond a certain point to exposure, broken rest, alarms all round 
the clock laborious physical exertions, knee or midthigh deep in 
mud sweating fatigues, followed by coolingoff in icy blasts or a 
broth of snow and chalkslime ormore undermining than any bodily 
stressthe pressure that grows of hourly responsibility. sooner 
or later, the mind surrenders itself to a millround of harassing 
obsessions as to whether, if one had led ones platoon up or down by 
such and such a deviationto the left or the right of a certain dead 
horse, for exampleif one had halted longer there or whipped up more 
cautiously elsewhereone might have saved such and such a casualty, 
entombment in the mud, or some other shrieking horror of the night. 
reason insists that it was not, and could not have been, ones own 
fault. memory brings back the face or the eyes of the dying, and the 
silence, always accusing, as the platoon goes forward. when this 
mood overtakes an officer he does well to go into rest for a while 
and pad his nerves, lest he arrive at that dreadful stage when he is 
convinced that his next turn of duty will see all his men destroyed 
by his own act. between this last stage and the dragging weariness, 
the hoarse somme cold, and the foul taste in the mouth which are 
mere signs of beginning to be fed up, there is every variety of 
derangement, to be held in check by the individuals own character 
and that discipline which age and experience have devised to hold him 
when everything else has dropped away. it is the deadly journey, back 
and forth to the frontline with material, the known and foreseen 
war in darkness and mud against the natural perversity of things, 
that shifts the foundations of the soul, so that a man, who scarcely 
regards death hunting him at large by the hour, will fall into a 
childs paroxysms of rage and despair when the wirestrand rasps him 
across the knuckles or the duckboard for the hundredth time tilts 
sideways underfoot. yell understand, says the voice of experience, 
the fatigues do it in the long run. all of which the diary will 
dismiss with a few fatigues were found in this area. 

the somme was one overwhelming fatigue. 




191z 

the somme to gouzeaucourt 


the beginning of the year saw the british armies, now more than fifty 
divisions strong, holding a front of a hundred and ten miles from 
ypres to within a short distance of roye. thus, allowing for changes 
imposed by the fluctuations of war and attack, they lay 

the second army had the salient the first centred on armentires 
the third goughs carried on to the south of arras, where the fifth 
held all along the valley of the ancre and a portion of the old 
british line on the somme. the fourth joined the french left wing 
near roye, and the french pressure worked in with ours. 

from the salient to the somme battlefront, our lines business was 
to draw as much as possible of the enemys strength. therefore, our 
raids on that part of the line, during the latter half of 1916, were 
counted by the hundred and in all that time, at no point on any 
given day there, could the germans feel secure against our irruptions. 

on the somme our pressure was direct and, except for the weather, 
worked as continuously as a forest fire in fallen pineneedles. a 
fold of the hills might check it there a bare ridge or a sodden 
valley hold it elsewhere for the while but always it ate north 
and east across the stricken country, as division after division 
gathered, fought, won foothold, held it, dug in, and gave place to 
their unspent fellows beneath the cover of the advancing guns. here 
is a mere outline of the work of a few weeks 

the affairs of the 15th and 25th of september 1916, when the fourth 
army pushed the line past lesbufs and flers and beyond gueudecourt 
on the right, knocked out, as we know, both battalions of the irish 
guards for the time being. 

on the 2zth and 28th of september the second and first canadian 
divisions, with the eleventh and eighteenth of the second army corps, 
captured thiepval, the stuff and schwaben redoubts on the left of the 
line while the fiftyfifth and new zealand divisions made possible 
an advance on le sars and eaucourt labbaye villages in the centre, 
which, after four days continuous fighting by the fortyseventh, 
fiftieth, and twentythird divisions, ended in the taking of eaucourt 
labbaye and le sars. 

on the zth of october the french army attacked in the direction 
of saillysaillisel, the fourth army chiming in along its whole 
front from lesbufs to destremont farm, which had been taken by the 
twentythird division on the 29th september. in this affair the 
twentythird division captured le sars, and the twentieth division 
over a mile of trenches east of gueudecourt. 

then the treacherous weather broke once more, and the battered and 
crumbled ground held their feet till a few days of dry cold were 
snatched for an attack in the direction of courcelette by four 
divisions fourth canadian, eighteenth, fifteenth, and thirtyninth, 
where a fresh line was needed. 

on the 23rd october, and on the 5th november again, as sideissues 
while waiting on the weather for a serious attack on beaumonthamel, 
a couple of divisions fourth and eighth went in with a french 
attack against pierre st. vaast wood, where a tangle of enemy 
trenches at the junction of the two armies was slowly smoked and 
burned out. 

the 10th of november after one days fine weather gave the fourth 
canadian division a full days fighting and, once more, a thousand 
yards of trench in the courcelette sector. 

on the 13th of november the battle of the ancre opened from serre 
to east of the schwaben redoubt thirtyfirst, third, second, 
fiftyfirst, thirtyninth and nineteenth divisions, with the 
intention of gaining command of both banks of the river, where it 
entered the enemy lines six or seven miles north of albert. this 
was a sector of the old german front to the west, which had thrown 
back our opening attack of july 1, and had grown no more inviting 
since. serre itself, helped by the state of the ground before it, was 
impossible, but beaucourt, beaumonthamel, and a portion of the high 
ground above it, with the village of st. pierredivion in the valley, 
were, in the course of the next few days, captured and held. 

all the above takes no count of incessant minor operations, losses 
and recaptures of trenches, days and nights of bombing that were 
necessary to silence nests of subterranean works, marked on the maps 
of peace as villages nor of the almost monotonous counterattacks 
that followed on the heels of every gain. so long as movement was 
possible the somme front was alive from end to end, according as one 
hardgained position gave the key to the next, or unscreened some 
hitherto blinded works. against every disadvantage of weather and 
over ground no troops in history had before dared to use at that 
season, the system and design of the advance revealed itself to the 
enemy. their counterattacks withered under our guns or died out in 
the fuming, rawdug trenches the slopes that had been their screens 
were crowned and turned against them their infantry began to have 
no love for the bluntnosed tanks, which, though not yet come to 
the war in battalions, were dragging their smeared trails along the 
ridges the fighting aeroplanes worried them, too, with machinegun 
fire from overhead photographers marked their covered ways by day 
and our heavy bombers searched them by night, as owls search stubble 
for mice. it all cost men and stuff, and the german army command had 
little good news to send back to the german tribes. 

yet the last six months of 1916 had advanced our front no more than 
some eight milesalong the albertbapaume road. at no point were 
we more than ten miles from our beginnings. all that showed on the 
map was that the enemys line to the north had been pinched into 
a salient which, starting from just east of arras, followed the 
line of the old german front built up two years before, through 
monchyaubois, gomiecourt and serre to the high white grounds 
above beaumonthamel. thence it turned east across the ancre, 
seven or eight kilometres north of arras, skirted grandcourt, 
crossed the arrowstraight albertbapaume road by the dreary butte 
de warlencourt, ran northeast of gueudecourt, and on the rim of 
the rise above le transloy, till it crossed the pronnebapaume 
road just north of saillysaillisel. here it swung southeast from 
rancourt and bouchavesnes down the long slopes to the valley of the 
somme, and its marshes west of pronne. thence, southwesterly by 
bernyensanterre, ablaincourt to the outskirts of chaulnes, ending 
at le quesnoyensanterre, where the french took on. the twentyfive 
mile stretch from le transloy to le quesnoy was the new section that 
had been handed over to the british care, piece by piece, at the end 
of the year. 

to meet this pinch and all that they could see that it meant, 
the germans had constructed, while they and the weather held us, 
elaborate second and third lines of defence behind their heavily 
fortified front. the first barriera double line of trenches, 
heavily wired, ran behind saillysaillisel, past le transloy to 
the albertbapaume road, grvillers and loupart woods, and via 
achietlepetit to bucquoy. 

parallel to this, at a distance ranging from one to two miles, was 
a new line through rocquigny, bapaume, and ablainzevelle, almost 
equally strong and elaborate. behind it, as every one understood, 
was a thing called the hindenburg line, known to the germans as 
siegfrieda fortymile marvel of considered defences with branches 
and spurs and switches, one end of which lay on st. quentin and the 
other outside arras. this could be dealt with later, but, meantime, 
the enemy in the arrasle transloy salient were uneasy. the attacks 
delivered on selected positions the little interrelated operations 
that stole a few hundred yards of trench or half a village at a leap, 
or carried a gungroup to a position whence our batteries could 
peer out and punish above all, the cold knowledge that sooner or 
later our unimaginative, unmilitary infantry would shamble after 
the guns, made them think well of lines in their rear to which they 
could retire at leisure. verdun had not fallen very many of their 
men lay dead outside its obliterated forts, and so very many living 
were needed to make good the daily drain of the somme that they had 
none too many to spare for austrian or turkish needs. their one 
energetic ally was the weather, which, with almost comic regularity, 
gave them time after each reverse to draw breath, position more guns, 
reorganise reliefs, and explain to their doubting public in germany 
the excellence and the method of their armys plans for the future. 
the battle of the ancre, for instance, was followed by an absolute 
deadlock of six weeks, when our armiesone cannot assault and dig 
out battalions at the same timedropped everything to fight the mud, 
while our frontline wallowed in bottomless trenches where subalterns 
took from three to six hours to visit their posts on a front of one 
quarter of a mile. 

bitter frosts set in with the first weeks of the new year and the 
small operations began at once, on our side, round such portions 
of the beaumonthamel heights as the enemy still clung to. here the 
third, seventh, and eleventh divisions fought, shift by shift, for 
the rest of january and won the high ground needed for our guns to 
uncover against serre and grandcourt, which were the keys of the 
positions at the corner of the arrasle transloy salient. thanks 
to our airwork, and the almost daily improvement in the power and 
precision of our barrages, that little army came through its campaign 
without too heavy losses, and still further cramped the enemys 
foothold along the ancre, while the rest of the line enjoyed as much 
peace as the somme allowed them when there was nothing doing. 


marking time 

the guards division, after their ten days rest and cleanup at 
sandpits camp, maulte, supplied one brigade to take over a new 
sector of trench opposite st. pierre vaast wood on the extreme 
east of things and left their 1st brigade in reserve at maulte, 
villesouscorbie, and mricourt labb. the latter camp was allotted 
to the irish guards who had to send one company for permanent 
fatigues to the railway stationall the valley here was one long 
siding for men and suppliesand another to the back of bernafay wood 
for decauville construction, while the remainder were drilled and 
instructed in their specialties. this was the time in our armies 
development when nearly every third man was a specialist in some 
branch or another except, as company officers remarked under their 
breaths, the rifle and its bayonet. the mens deferred christmas 
dinners it will be remembered they had been in the line on the day 
itself were duly issued by half a battalion at a time in the big 
cinemahall in camp, and, lest the transport officer should by any 
chance enjoy himself, their transport chose this time of rest to 
develop contagious stomatitis, a form of thrush in the mouth, and 
had to be isolated. still, setting aside the cold, which does not 
much trouble wellfed men, the battalion had some pleasant memories 
of its rest by the river. leave was possible smokingparties made 
themselves in the big huts the sergeants gave a dinner, which is a 
sure sign of wellbeing there were cinemas for the men, and no one 
troubled himself too much for the noise of the guns ten miles up 
stream. 

it is difficult to rediscover a battalions psychology at any given 
time, but so far as evidence goes they had not too black doubts 
as to the upshot of the campaign, though every platoon kept its 
loudvoiced pessimists who foretold that they would take root in the 
trenches for evermore and christened the r.o.d. locomotives roll on 
duration 

on the 1st february 191z in cold bright weather with snow on the 
ground, the 1st brigade were once again in divisional reserve near 
carnoy, ready to relieve the 3rd coldstream near rancourt on the 
recently takenover french sector, in trenches a little westerly 
of st. pierre vaast wood which is under saillysaillisel. in the 
wood itself lay a dreadful minecrater of the old days, filled, as 
it seemed, with dead french colonial troopsbrowned and blackened 
bodies, their white skulls still carrying jaunty red caps. our 
wondering patrols used to look down into it sometimes of moonlight 
nights. 

they moved out on the 2nd of february via maricourt and maurepas, 
left no. 2 company under canvas in maurepas ravine, distributed the 
rest in shelters and dugouts and resumed their watch. the frozen 
ground stopped much digging or improvements, and the enemys front 
line gave no trouble, but a few small shells were sent over, one 
of which hit 2nd lieutenant j. orr temporarily in command of no. 1 
company and wounded a couple of men. the rest of their turnfebruary 
2 to 6was quiet, for the newfallen snow gave away the least 
movement on either side. while they crouched over their braziers and 
watched each other, the operations round serre and at the nose of the 
arrasle transloy salient, began again as the earths crust hardened. 
the sixtythird division hammered its way for a day and a night up 
the southern slopes of serre, and our guns were threatening the line 
of enemys trenches from grandcourt westward. this move unkeyed the 
arch of his local defences at this point, and next day he evacuated 
grandcourt and such of his front as lay between grandcourt and the 
stuff redoubt. 

by the zth february our troops had carried forward to midway between 
beaucourt and miraumont, and on the 10th february the thirtysecond 
division took in hand the business of shifting the enemy out of what 
remained to him in the beaumont valley. their advance brought serre 
village into direct danger from our artillery, and any further move 
on our part up the valley of the ancre would make serre untenable. 

on the 1zth february that move was made by three divisions second, 
eighteenth, and sixtythird before dawn, through heavy mist on 
the edge of a thaw, and in the face of a wellcontrived barrage 
that caught the battalions forming up. but the positions and 
observationpoints, already gained, helped our guns to help the 
infantry, broke up the enemys counterattacks with satisfactory 
losses, and, in the next few days, gave us good command over the 
enemys artillery dispositions in the valley of the upper ancre and 
a fair look into his defences at pys and miraumont. then the game 
stood thus if miraumont, which lay at our mercy, were taken, serre 
would go if serre went, puisieuxaumont and gomiecourt, the pillar 
of the old german western defences, would be opened too and it was 
no part of the german idea to cling to untenable positions, whose 
loss would have to be explained at home where people were asking why 
victory delayed so long. not only was the whole of arrasle transloy 
salient shaking by now there was the prospect of indefinite wastage 
to no good end all along the rest of the somme front, and though 
the weather, till then, had blunted the following weight of each 
following blow, many considerations pointed to a temporary withdrawal 
of a few miles in order to advance the more irresistibly at a more 
fitting time. slowly, methodically then, with careful screens of 
veiled machineguns behind them, and a series of scientifically 
chosen artillery positions, equally capable of supporting a 
counterattack, or checking and destroying any too inconvenient 
body of pursuers, the enemy moved back into ground not yet churned 
and channelled by shell or traffic, over untouched roads which he 
had kept in perfect order, to this very end and left us to follow 
through bottomless valleys of desolation. 

the frost broke on the third week of february, and the last state 
of the ground was worse even than it had been throughout the rainy 
autumn. trenches caved in bodily dumps sank where they were being 
piled the dirt and the buttresses of overhead shelters flaked and 
fell away in lumps duckboards went under by furlongs at a time 
tanks were immobilised five feet deep and the very bellies of the 
fieldguns gouged into the mud. only our airmen could see anything 
beyond or outside the present extreme discomfort, but the mists that 
came punctually with the thaws helped to baffle even their eyes. 

on the 24th february the enemy had evacuated his positions in front 
of pys, miraumont, and serre next day his first system of defence, 
from gueudecourt to west of serre, running through halfadozen 
fortified villages, was in our hands. 

at the end of the month, puisieuxaumont, with gomiecourt and its 
defences, were occupied by us. the germans had pulled themselves 
cleanly out of the worst of the salient. 

by march they were back on their fortified le transloyloupart line, 
except that they still held the village of irles above miraumont, 
which was linked up to the le transloyloupart line by a peninsula 
of wired trenches. irles was carried by the second and eighteenth 
divisions on the 10th march. 

as soon as our guns were able to concentrate on the le 
transloyloupart line itself, which they did the day after, the 
enemy, leisurely as always, released it, and fell back on and through 
his next line a mile or two behindrocquignyablainzevellesteadied 
his rearguards, and continued his progress towards the hindenburg 
defences, withdrawing along the whole front from south of arras to 
roye. by the 1zth of march word was given for a general advance of 
our troops in cooperation with the french. 

to go back a month. rumours of what was to be expected had cheered 
the camps for some time past and just as the fall of single 
rocks precedes the collapse of an undermined quarryface, so the 
german line had crumpled in certain spots long before their system 
readjusted itself throughout. fronttrenches, far removed from 
actual points of pressure, observed that life with them was quieter 
than even the state of the weather justified, and began to make 
investigations. 

when the battalion went up, as usual, on the 15th february to relieve 
the 2nd grenadiers in the trenches a little north of rancourt and 
opposite st. pierre vaast wood, their casualties for the four days 
were but three killed and five wounded. practically no sniping and 
very occasional shelling. they treated it lightly enough, for it was 
here that the sentry told the conscientious officer who had heard a 
shell drop near the trench ah, it fell quite convenient herea 
jerk of his thumb over his shoulder, and as an afterthoughttwas a 
dud, though. the ground was still hard, and, to the mens joy, they 
could not dig. 

captain r. j. p. rodakowski arrived from the base on the 18th of the 
month. the thaw caught them in camp at maurepas, just as the enemys 
withdrawal got under way, and their turn in trenches from the 23rd to 
26th february was marked by barrages let down on them of evenings, 
presumably to discourage curiosity. so they were ordered at short 
notice to send out a couple of officers patrols from their left 
and right companies to reconnoitre generally, and see if the enemy 
were falling back. the first patrol, under 2nd lieutenant shears, an 
n.c.o., three bombers, and three bayonetmen, spent a couple of 
hours among the wire, were bombed but returned unhurt. the second, 
also of seven men, under lieutenant browne, were seen by the enemy, 
headed back to our lines, but made a fresh outfall, which carried 
them to the wire where, finding a weak spot, they cut their way 
through it and won within a few yards of the enemys parapet when 
they were bombed. they used up their own supplies and came back with 
a good report, and four men and lieutenant browne wounded. on their 
information a raid was arranged for the next day to take over a 
couple of hundred yards of the enemys trench, but it was cancelled 
pending developments elsewhere. they lost two killed and thirteen 
men and one officer wounded in this tour, and went back to routine 
and specialist training in a camp near billon on the last day of 
february. 

their domestic items for the next fortnight, which, like the rest 
of march, was cold and stormy, run as follows 2nd lieutenant a. l. 
bain went to the fourteenth corps school for a fortnight at maulte, 
which, in that weather, was no special treat and lieutenant e. 
h. shears to headquarters lewis gun school at le touquet, a much 
superior place. lieut.colonel r. c. a. mccalmont left on the 3rd 
march to take over command of the 3rd infantry brigade just south of 
the somme, and had a tremendous sendoff from the battalion. he was 
succeeded in the command by major the hon. h. r. alexander, d.s.o., 
m.c., and major g. e. s. young came over from the 2nd battalion 
as second in commandas it proved for all too brief a time. the 
specialist training continued, and open warfare was practised 
by companies. there was an irreverent campjest just then that 
whenever the enemy abandoned one quarter of a mile of trench, the 
five nearest british army corps forsook every other game to practise 
open warfare. the battalion learned also attacks on triple lines of 
trenches, the creeping barrage being personified by their drums and 
those of the 2nd coldstream. in this sort of work, men say, there is 
a tendency to lean a little too heavily on such a barrage, which had 
to be checked by taking the offenders name. so, yell understand, 
ye catch it, both ways for if ye purshue the live barrage yell 
likely to be killed an if you purshue a dhrummy barrage too close, 
your names in the book. thats war 


the somme advance 

by the middle of march the german line was giving all along and 
when the battalion moved up into brigade reserve on the 12th, they 
understood an advance was close at hand. their allotted and sketchy 
stretch of trench, which they took over from the 4th grenadiers on 
the 13th march, was at saillysaillisel, of evil associations, 
and on the 14th, on information received after patrolling under 
lieutenant e. budd and lieutenant bagenal, the german front line 
ahead was reported clear and at once occupied. then they were 
committed to a muddle of german works in the direction of le 
mesnilenarrouaise, which were named after the idols of the tribes. 
there was nothing to see or to steer by except devastated earth, 
mud, wire, scraps of sandbags, heaped rubbish and carcases. the 
whole line went forward on the 15th, the 1st battalion irish guards 
in touch by patrol with their 2nd battalion on their right and on 
the left with the 2nd coldstream. no one knew exactly what was in 
the enemys mind, or how far his retirement was extending, but an 
hour after the battalion had started they came under longrange 
machinegun and heavy artillery fire while they were consolidating 
bayreuth trench. major g. e. s. young was so badly wounded this 
day by a shell, which came through a company headquarters dugout 
he was visiting, that he died in a hospital a fortnight later and 
was buried at grovetown cemetery, and lieutenant walter mumford, 
m.c., was slightly wounded in the leg. the next trench, gotha, 
was also under gunfire. they simply moved forward, it seemed, into 
registered areas, where they were held up, as by a hose of high 
explosives, till the enemy had completed his local arrangements. 
then his artillery on that sector would withdraw across clean, hard 
country some longrange machinegun or sniping work might continue 
for a while and then all would be silent, with the sudden curious 
silences of the somme, till the next step forward was made on our 
side and dealt with as above. thus the battalion worked through the 
emptied german trenches and dugouts, and on the 20th march held 
a line from le mesnilenarrouaise to manancourt on the tortille 
river. the german retreat was as orderly as an ebbtide. in the 
north, bapaume had been taken on the 1zth march by the first and 
second australian division, and pronne was occupied on the 18th by 
the fortyeighth division. beyond bapaume our troops entered the 
third and lastbeugnyytresline of german trench and wirework 
that lay between them and the hindenburg defences four or five miles 
behind it across open country. from pronne southward to close upon 
germaine, where we were in touch with the french, our advanceparties 
had crossed the somme and spread themselves, as far as the state of 
the ground allowed, init could hardly be called pursuit so much as 
a heavyfooted followingup of the enemy, and making our own roads 
and tracks as we moved. we found everything usable thoughtfully 
destroyed, and had to reconstruct it from the beginnings, ere any 
further pressure could be exercised. 

the german front before arras was unaffected by their withdrawal, 
and here preparations of every conceivable sort were being piled up 
against the approaching battle of the ancre where from croisilles 
to vimy ridge our third and first armies broke through on a front 
of fifteen miles on april 9, and after a weeks desperate fighting, 
hampered as usual by the weather, carried that front four miles 
farther eastward, captured 13,000 prisoners and 200 guns and, 
through the next month, fought their road up and into the northern 
end of the hindenburg line near bullecourt whose name belongs to 
australia. 

on the 23rd of march the battalion was taken out of its 
unmolested german trenches and marched to combles, where it was 
used in roadmaking between frgicourt, bullet crossroads and 
saillysaillisel, till the 5th of april. there was just one day 
in that stretch without rain, hail or snow, and when they were 
not roadmaking they buried dead and collected salvage and were 
complimented by the commanding officer of engineers on their good 
work. as the men said it was great days for the engineersbad luck 
to embut it kept us warm. 

their total losses for march had been one officer, major g. e. s. 
young, killed and one, lieutenant walter mumford, m.c., slightly 
wounded fourteen other ranks killed and forty woundedfiftysix 
in all or less than 10 per cent. of the battalions strength at the 
time. second lieutenant h. v. fanshawe joined on the 30th march. 

on the 6th april they changed over to railway construction on the 
broadgauge track between morval and rocquigny. the men camped at 
one end of le transloy village and battalion headquarters in the 
only house much damaged that still stood up. here they stayed and 
slaved for a week, in hail and snow and heavy frosts at night and 
were practically reclothed as their uniforms were not in the best 
of condition. ye could not have told us fromfrom anything or 
anybody ye were likely to meet in those parts, yell understand. 
butone comfortwe was all alikeofficers an all. a village 
that has not been too totally wrecked is a convenient dump to draw 
up. the men improved their camp and floored their tents out of 
material at hand, and were rewarded by finding usable german stores 
among the ruins. one sees how their morale held up, in spite of 
dirt, ironrust and foul weather, from the fact that they went 
out of their way to constructeven as they had done at ypresa 
magnificent irish guards star of glass and stones all surrounded by 
a low boxhedge. nor was it forgotten that they were soldiers and, 
in spite of the railwaywork, and the demands of the sappers, some 
of the specialists and occasionally a company could be trained at 
le transloy. even training is preferable to fatigues, and on the 
15th of april they were taken in hand in good earnest. they marched 
twelve miles in pouring rain to a camp at bronfay where a very 
strict course of platoon training for all ranks was undertaken. it 
began with twenty minutes walking or running in the usual rain or 
snow before breakfast at z.30, and it continued with a halfhours 
break till halfpast twelve. even after three days there was an 
appreciable improvement in drill and smartness, says the diary, and 
when their brigadier inspected them on the 22nd april he was pleased 
to compliment. of afternoons, every one seemed to lecture to every 
one else according to their seniority the brigadier on outposts 
the commanding officermajor r. baggallayon advance and rear 
guards, the officers to the platoonsergeants on every detail of 
lifesaving or taking, and when their own resources failed, the c.o. 
of the 2nd coldstream lectured all officers and sergeants of the 
1st brigade on the attack in open warfare. it was a very thorough 
shakingupfoot and transportfrom the specialists to the cooks 
mate and it culminated in no. 5 platoon lieutenant e. budd being 
chosen to represent the battalion at the brigade platoon competition 
in drill, arms drill, musketry, bayonetfighting and a tactical 
exercise. the 2nd grenadiers platoon won, but no. 5 justified itself 
by taking a very close second place. survivors, who remember, assert 
that the platoons of those days were in knowledge, strength, and 
virtue immeasurably above all known standards of fighting men. and 
in the long run, dye see, they went with the rest. all gone maybe 
therell be one or two of em leftpolicemen or tramconductors an 
such like but in their day an time, yell understand, there was 
nothing could equal them. 

the lighter side of life was supplied by the 3rd coldstreams 
historic and unparalleled pantomime, which ran its ribald and 
immensely clever course for ten consecutive nights when the cars of 
the staff might be seen parked outside the theatre precisely as in 
the west end. 

on the 1st may they resumed work on the etricourtfins railroad and 
made camp among the ruins of the village for the next three weeks 
in fine hot weather. the officers and n.c.o.s were exercised 
freely at mapreading which on the somme required high powers of 
imagination, sketching reports and compasswork and occasionally 
officers and n.c.o.s made up a platoon and worked out small tactical 
exercisessuch as the rushin and downing of a suddenly raised 
machinegun after a barrage had lifted. the men were kept to the 
needs of railway and transport, but it was an easy life in warm, 
grassy etricourt after months of mud and torn dirt. a swimming bath 
was dug for them there were wild flowers to be gathered, and an 
orchard in blossom to show that the world still lived naturally, 
and their work was close to their paradegrounds. men spoke 
affectionately of etricourt where shellholes were so few that they 
could count them. 

a homedraft had brought the battalion six pipers who on the 4th of 
may played at retreat for the first time, and thereafter followed 
the battalions fortunes. as everybody knows, irish pipes have one 
drone less than the scottish, but it is not commonly understood that 
the piper in his closefitting saffron kilt plays them almost without 
any movement of the bodya point of difference that has puzzled very 
many scots regiments. that immobility, as the pipe major observed on 
an historic occasion, is one of the secrets of the regiment. 

on the 20th of may they marchednot without some discomfort from an 
artillery brigade which was trying to use the same road at the same 
timefrom etricourt to curlu on the somme, where they were once 
more billeted in houses. here, after so many weeks of making their 
own camps to their own minds, they were introduced to other peoples 
housekeeping, and found the whole village left in a filthy condition 
by previous troops. so they cleaned it up and trained and learned 
from the divisional gas officer of transport how gashelmets should 
be adjusted on horsesto which some of the scared beasts hotly 
objected and they bathed by companies in the warm somme, making 
a picnic of it, while the longdrawn battle of the ancre in the 
north died down to mere bloody dayandnight war among the villages 
covering the hindenburg line and its spurs. the talk in the camps 
turned on great doingseverything connected with the frontline 
was doingsagainst messines ridge that looks over the flat 
shellbitten salient where there is more compulsory trenchbathing 
than any man wants. it had commanded too much of that country for 
too long. at its highest point, where wytschaete village had once 
stood, it overlooked ypres and the british positions around, and was 
a menace over desolate plugstreet far towards armentires. rumour 
ran that arrangements had been made to shift it bodily off the face 
of the earth that populations of miners had burrowed there through 
months, for miles that all underground was riddled with workings 
where men fought in the dark, up and down tunnels that caved, round 
the sharp turns of boarded and bagged galleries, and on the lips of 
black shafts that dropped one into fortyfoot graves. yet, even were 
messines ridge wiped out, the enemy had large choices of commanding 
positions practically all round the salient, and it seemed likely, 
by what news sifted into their area, that the guards might be called 
upon before long to help in further big doings, ypres wayperhaps a 
breakthrough towards lille. 


the salient and boesinghe 

the salient had been the running sore in our armies side since the 
first. now that we had men, guns, and material, it looked as if it 
might be staunched at last. a battalion does not think beyond its 
immediate interestseven officers are discouraged from trying to run 
the war by themselvesbut it did not need to be told that it had not 
been fattened up the last few weeks for headquarters pleasure in its 
appearance. men know when they are for it, and if they forget, are 
reminded from the doors of crowded estaminets and canteens, or from 
the tailboards of loaded lorries as their comrades fleet by in the 
dusk. they were not surprised when orders came for a shift. 

on the evening of the 30th may they were taken by train from their 
camp, via amiens, abbeville, and boulogne and st. omer to cassel 
in thirteen or fourteen hours, and from cassel marched back along 
the wellknown pav nearly to st. omer again and billeted between la 
crosse and the dingy wide railwaycrossing at fort rouge. all the 
country round was busy raising crops every old man, woman, and child 
working as long as light lasted. their only available trainingground 
was the forest of clairmarais, with its two characteristic wooded 
hills that stand up behind st. omer. here they were taught 
woodfighting in addition to other specialties, and the mess 
found time to give a dinner of honour to a friendly fieldambulance 
irish in the main to whom they had, on various occasions, owed 
much. scandal asserts that the guests departed, in the dawn, on 
their own stretchers. here, too, on the 6th june they entered for 
the brigade horseshow and won first prize for the best turned out 
limberandpair, and seconds for watercart and cookerandpairno 
small thing when one considers what is the standard of excellence in 
brigade transport. 

on the next day june z, the nineteen mines of messines went up 
together in the dawn. the three army corps second anzac and ninth 
and tenth corps loosed behind them, broke forward over messines and 
wytschaete, and the whole german line from armagh wood to plugstreet 
was wrenched backwards from a mile to two miles all along. messines 
was a singularly complete and satisfactory affair, including some 
seven thousand prisoners and, better still, a multitude of dead, 
killed off in counterattacks. it opened the road for the third 
battle of ypres which was to win more breathingspace round the wreck 
of the city. unlike arras, where there was almost unlimited space 
for assembly in subterranean caves and cellars, every preparation 
in the salient had to be carried out under the enemys eyes on 
known and registered ground lacking shelter above or below. thus 
the attack, which was to cover a front of fifteen miles, demanded 
as much effort and prearrangement as any operation that had till 
then been undertaken in the whole course of the war. those were made 
and carried through among, and in spite of, the daily demands of 
continuous local operations, with the same thoroughness and fixedness 
of purpose as when the brigade competed for its little prizes and 
trophies at renescure horseshow. 

on the 12th june the battalion marched thirteen miles for musketry to 
moringhem in the bare, high downcountry behind acquin, where two men 
collapsed with heatstroke. a century ago the drillbook laid down 
that unaimed battalionfire from brown bess should never be opened 
at over four hundred yards. they practised slow and rapid firing with 
fixed bayonets at two and three hundred company sharpshooters using 
figures at the same range. 

on the 16th june the first drawing in towards the salient began. 
they camped that night at ouderzeele north of cassel, after such 
heat as made several of the men fall out by the way, and on the 1zth 
bivouacked in sheds and shelters in the woods southeast of proven 
on the poperinghe road, where the cultivation, all unaffected by the 
war half a dozen miles off, was as thick as ever, and, except for 
specialist training in the woods, it was difficult to find the men 
work. the men bore this quite calmly. 

as a sign of the times lieutenant h. hickie, who had been on leave, 
arrived and again took over his duties as quartermaster on the 
20th june. lieutenant j. h. nash left on the same date for the army 
central school, and on the 22nd captain r. rodakowski and lieutenant 
w. joyce were detailed for courses of instruction at le touquet lewis 
gun school. 

on the 23rd june, majorgeneral sir a. j. godley, commanding the 
second anzac corps, came over on a visit to the battalion and 
inspected the men, and day by day the pieces required for the next 
move on the chessboard of war were pushed into their places along 
the salient. the fifth armyof four corps and some divisionsunder 
general gough was to take the weight of the affair between klein 
zillebeeke and boesinghe, while the first french armyfirst and 
fiftyfirst divisionswould relieve the belgians from boesinghe to 
noordschoote and extend the line along the yser canal north of ypres 
to steenstraate. the guards division was to lie next them on the 
extreme left of our line at boesinghe. 

on the 25th june, the battalion moved from proven into the edge 
of the battlearea near woesten, a couple of miles or so behind 
boesinghe itself, and came under the fire of a longrange german 
naval gun which merely cut up the fields round them. both sides were 
now hard at work in the air, trying to put out each others eyes 
and a german aeroplane brought down one of our observationballoons 
hideously alight, close to woesten camp. all the salient hummed 
with opposing aircraft, the bombing of backareas was cruel and 
continuous, and men had no rest from strain. but our batteries, 
profiting by the help of our machines, hammered the enemy line as 
it had not been hammered there since war began. oildrums, gas and 
thermite shells were added to the regular allowances sent over, and, 
whenever chance offered, raidingparties dove in and out of the front 
lines sharking prisoners for identification. the battalions share 
in this work was the usual fatigueunloading trucks and the like, 
beneath intermittent artilleryfire which, on the 29th june, ended in 
three direct hits on the farmhouse roussel farm near elverdinghe, 
where they lay. one man was killed outright and three others wounded. 
their regular routinework of death had begun again. 

on the 1st of july they went into line on the boesinghe sector, 
relieving the 2nd coldstream on the west or near sector of the yser 
canal. their trenches were of the usual builtup, sandbagged type. 
headquarters were at bleuet farm, well under fire of all kinds, 
and though they managed their relief at night with little shelling, 
early next morning, lieutenant e. shears was killed by shell. it 
was a bad sector in every way, for not only did the battalion link 
on here to the belgian armylater relieved by the frenchon their 
left, and any point of junction of allied forces is always severely 
dealt with, but the enemy were kept in tension by constant raids, 
or the fear of them, all along the line. this meant that their sos 
signals went up on the least provocation and their barrages followed 
with nervous punctuality. added to this, fatiguework was very heavy, 
not only in repairs but in supply and the necessary exposure of the 
carryingparties led to constant casualties. 

on the 5th july, for instance, at two in the morning, gas shells 
fired from projectors the germans were searching the line in earnest 
that night fell on a workingparty of no. 4 company. nineteen men 
were at once prostrated, of whom one died then and there, and two a 
few days later while lieutenant bagenal was slightly affected. it 
is difficult, especially in the dark, to keep workingparties, who 
have to work against time, inside their gasmasks. they were shelled 
for the rest of the day with no further casualties. 

on the 6th july major hon. h. r. alexander, leaving for england to 
attend the officers course at aldershot, captain r. r. c. baggallay 
took over the command, and on the 8th july they were relieved by 
the 3rd coldstream and bivouacked at cardoen farm, where they spent 
two days nominally restingthat is to say, supplying one hundred 
and ten men each night for the detestable work of carryingparties 
to the front line. lieut.colonel rocke, d.s.o., commanding since 
may 24, returned from leave on july 8, but unluckily on the 11th, 
when the battalion was in line, in the wreck of boesinghe village 
headquarters at boesinghe chteau, slipped and broke his shoulder 
while going round the trenches, and captain baggallay again took 
over command. there was steady wellranged shelling all that day, 
particularly on boesinghe chteau, in the rear of which the aidpost 
and headquarters of no. 1 company lay. battalion headquarters were 
shelled for half an hour separately. no. 3 companys headquarters 
in the supportline were wrecked by direct hits, and the entire 
company shelled out, while the whole of the back lines were worked 
over, up and down. all repairs had to be built up with sandbags, for 
the ground was too marshy to give useful dirt, and the labour was 
unending. 

on the 12th july they were shelled more heavily than the previous two 
days on exactly the same places, and their transport, which till now 
had had reasonable luck, was caught fetching up water and rations. 
the four company quartermastersergeants and the messsergeant were 
wounded, a horse and groom killed, and, later on, the transport 
officer was slightly gassed. tis the transport, yell understand, 
that has to take all jerrys backchat after dhark, an no chance of 
replyin. by night they found carryingparties to fill dumpsfive 
of themeach dump seeming to those serving it more exposed and 
undesirable than the other four put together. 

on the 14th of july there was a german raid, preceded by an hours 
box barrage of trenchmortars, .zzs, and machineguns, on two 
platoons of no. 4 company then in the front line behind the canal. 
a shrapnelbarrage fell also on the supports. a box barrage is a 
square horror of descending fire cutting off all help, and ranks high 
among demoralising experiences. luckily, the line was lightly held, 
and the men had more or less of cover in dugouts and tunnels in the 
canal bank. a lewisgun post in a covered emplacement, almost on 
the bed of the canal itself, was first aware, through the infernal 
racket, of germans crossing the canal, and fired at them straight 
down the line of its bed. they broke and disappeared in the rank 
weedgrowth, but there was another rush over the parapet of the line 
between two sentry groups in the firingbays. the trenches were alive 
by then with scattered parties stumbling through the black dark, 
and mistaking each other for friends or enemies, and the ruin of 
the works added to the confusion. as far as can be made out, one 
officer, lieutenant h. j. b. eyre, coming along what was left of a 
trench, ran literally into a party of the enemy. his steel helmet and 
revolver, all chambers fired, were found afterwards near the wreck of 
a firingbay, but there was no other trace. it was learned later that 
he had been mortally wounded and died that evening. in trenchraids, 
when life, death, or capture often turn on a step to the left or the 
right, the marvel was that such accidents were not more frequent. 

a wounded german was captured. he had no marks of identification, 
but said he belonged to a schleswig regiment, and that the strength 
of the raid was intended to be two hundred. it did not, as the 
men said, feel anything like so many, though the wild lights of 
explosion that lit the scene showed large enemy parties waiting 
either in the bed of the canal or on the opposite bank. these, too, 
vanished into the dark after their comrades in the trenches had been 
turned out. probably, it was but an identification fray backed by a 
farreaching artillery hate that troubled all the backareas even 
up to elverdinghe. 

our frontline casualties in the affair were but one officer and one 
man missing and one wounded. yet the barrage blew the men about like 
withered leaves, covered them with mud, plastered them with bits of 
sandbags, and gapped, as it seemed, fathoms of trench at a stroke, 
while enemy machineguns scissored back and forth over each gap. the 
companies in the supportline who watched the affair and expected 
very few to come out of it alive, suffered much more severely from 
the shrapnelbarrage which fell to their share. 

it was their last tour in the trenches for ten days, and it closed 
with heavy barrages on the front and back lines, while they were 
being relieved by the 1st coldstream. this continued till our 
guns were asked to reply, and after ten minutes made them cease. 
the battalion left the trenches in a steady downpour of wet and 
entrained from elverdinghe for proven, whence they moved into the 
trainingarea at herzeele, where a representation of the ground to 
be attacked on the day of battle, with its trenches and farms, was 
marked out, and had to be studied by company commanders, n.c.o.s, 
and men according to their rank and responsibility. the officers 
mess at herzeele was in the quaint old threestoried tower, built 
when the spaniards held rule in the low countries. 

from the 16th to the 23rd july their mornings were spent at every 
sort of drillsmokehelmet drill, musketry, wiring, lewisgun, etc., 
and their afternoons in going over the trainingground and practising 
attacks. all that time the weather was perfect. as soon as they moved 
away to proven and into the battlearea on july 25 heavy rain began, 
which, as on the somme, where the devil duly looked after his own, 
was destined to baulk and cripple the battle. for an introduction to 
their next months work, the battalion, roused at 2 a. m. on that 
day by gasalarms from the front, provided over five hundred men for 
workingparties to get stuff into the front line lost ten men killed 
by shellfire and one officer, lieutenant h. h. maxwell who had come 
unscathed through the raid of the 14th, and seven men wounded and 
next evening moved to their own place, a distance of two and a half 
miles, with two hundred yard intervals between the platoons, under 
casual shellfire. 

they camped july 2z in support near bleuet farm, and, that evening, 
had word that our aeroplanes reported no germans could be seen in 
the german frontline system, and that the 3rd coldstream had sent 
patrols forward who were already established across the canal. as a 
matter of fact, the enemy was holding his front line in chains of 
single posts, preferring rather to fight for it than in it and was 
relying on his carefully hidden ferroconcrete blockhouseslater 
known as pillboxeswhich, as he had arranged them in the torn 
and marshy landscape, and along the line of the ypresstaden 
rail, could hold up and dissipate any average infantry attack. 
they were impervious to anything except direct hits of big stuff. 
their weakness was the small size of the slit through which their 
machineguns operated, and a certain clumsiness in the arrangement 
of the gun itself, which made it difficult to depress. consequently, 
cool heads could crawl up and under, and rush the thing at close 
quarters. 

whether the enemy believed there would be no serious attack at the 
junction of the french and british arms in the boesinghe sector, or 
whether he drew his men out of the front line to give room for his 
barrages, may never be known. it is certain, however, that he left 
his front line immediately facing the guards division empty, and that 
miscalculation enabled the guards to launch their attack without 
having first to fight their way across the canal. the coldstream had 
possessed themselves promptly of the evacuated trenches, and there 
stayed for some time before the enemy realised what had happened, 
sent aeroplanes to locate the raiders, and triedwithout successto 
shell them back again. it was a quick, wellthoughtout coup that 
saved very many good lives. 

on the 28th july the battalion, after various contradictory orders, 
was sent forward in the evening to relieve the left of the 3rd 
coldstream in the outpostline. there was a report that the enemy 
meditated an attack on that battalion at their junction with the 
thirtyeighth division on their right. it must be remembered that 
the french, who had had some difficulty in getting their guns 
forward, were not in place, and their first division lay on the left 
of the guards. up, then, went the battalion in the evening and 
took over the outpostline from douteuse house, to where it joined 
the french forces. two platoons of no. 2 company, under captain r. 
rodakowski, crossed the canal in the mud on improvised bridges of 
slabs of wood nailed across rabbitwire and canvas, and lay up in 
an old german front line. the other two platoons occupied the old 
british front line on the canal bank. battalion headquarters and 
aidpost were at the chteau, as usual. no. 1 company captain w. 
c. mumford, m.c. in support, and no. 4 company captain law, m.c. 
had a couple of platoons forward and two back. they were all shelled 
equally through that night with gas and lachrymal shells, plus 
barrages on headquarters and the various lines of support. the gas 
was responsible for six casualties, chiefly among signallers and 
orderlies, whose work kept them on the move. nothing could be done to 
strengthen the newly occupied trenches, as there was no wire on the 
spot for the r.e. parties, trying to bring it up, were pinned till 
daylight by backbarrages. 

on the 29th july a patrol was sent out to look at a concrete 
blockhouse which our artillery reported they were unable to destroy 
with the guns that were in use at the moment. the patrol drew fire 
from the blockhouse, went on into the dark, and found that the 
enemys line behind it was held by small posts only. returning, it 
would seem that they were fired at again, an n.c.o. and a man being 
wounded, but they wounded and captured a prisoner, who said that 
the post held twenty men. whereupon that blockhouse was kept under 
observation by small parties of our men, under lieutenant budd, m.c. 
next morning they observed five or six of the enemy lying out in 
shellholes round the blockhouse, which was too small for the whole 
of its garrison. this overflow was all sniped in due course, till 
the blockhouse, with fourteen unwounded prisoners, surrendered, was 
absorbed into our outpostline, and held against the enemys fire. 
considering that fire at the timewhich included 5.9s, 4.2s, and 
.zzsit was a neatly expeditious affair. the battalion was relieved 
by the 1st grenadiers and the welsh, and went back to camp in the 
forest area to spend the 30th july preparing themselves and their 
souls for the morrows work. 

the guards division lay, as we know, between the first french 
division on its left and our thirtyeighth division on its right 
the line of the ypresstaden railway with its blockhouses marking 
the limit between the two british divisions. this was an awkward 
junction, which caused trouble later. four objectives were laid 
down. the first was the nearest german system of trenches, which had 
lain under searching artilleryfire for some time, and would not be 
difficult the second, six hundred yards farther on, ran parallel to 
the pilckem road the third an imaginary line a hundred yards beyond 
the wellknown iron cross kortikaarcabaret road, beyond pilckem 
ridge, and the last went up to the steenbeek river. the total depth 
of the run was about two miles from the canal bank. 

the 2nd ponsonbys and the 3rd seymours brigades were to take 
the first three objectives, after which the 1st jeffreyss brigade, 
following close behind, was to come through and take the fourth. 
the 2nd brigade, which was on the right of the division, held 
the front from the ypresstaden railwaybridge over the canal to 
boesinghe bridge. the 3rd brigade continued the line to the left for 
six hundred yards. the 1st brigade, less the 1st irish and the 3rd 
coldstream, which were under the direct orders of general feilding, 
g.o.c. guards division, was in reserve. 

our barrages, conceived on a most generous scale, were timed to creep 
at a hundred yards in four minutes. they were put down at 3.50 a. m., 
july 31, a dark, misty morning on the edge of rain, and the whole 
attack went forward with satisfying precision so far as the guards 
division was concerned. the various objectives were reached at the 
given times, and level with the french advance. by eleven oclock the 
farthest was in our hands, and what difficulties there were arose 
from the division on the guards right being held up among unreduced 
blockhouses enfilading them from the railway line. 

meantime, the 1st battalion irish guards spent the day, after 
breakfast at a quarterpast five, in reserve round the little 
tworoomed, sandbagged and concreted chasseur farm, where there 
was an appletree with all its leaves on under half an hours 
notice to move up if required. but no order came. they were shelled 
intermittently all day, with a few casualties, and captain f. s. law 
was slightly wounded. the evening, as pessimists prophesied, closed 
in heavy rain, and the ground began to go. they stayed where they 
were till the afternoon of the 1st august, when word came to take 
over the line held by the 3rd grenadiers and the 1st coldstream on 
the first, second, and third objectives. 

they moved out in rain into the usual wilderness of shellholes 
filling with water, but for the moment were not shelled. no. 
4 company went by daylight to its positions on the first 
objectivecariboo wood and some halfwipedout german trenchsystems 
in a partly destroyed wood. the other companies waited till dusk 
before distributing themselves on the green linethe third 
objectivewhich was about a thousand yards this side the steenbeek 
river. while the move was in progress, a brigade of the thirtyeighth 
division reported that they had been shelled out of their advanced 
positions on the river and were falling back, which, as far as 
could be seen, would leave the right flank of the guards division 
in the air. if this were so, and the dusk and the rain made it 
difficult to judge, it was imperative to put everything else aside 
and form a defensive flank along the railway line that separated 
the two divisions. the companies were diverted accordingly, hastily 
redirected in the dark, and, when all was done, the brigade that had 
made the trouble went back to its original position on the further 
objective. there was small choice of sleepingplaces that night. 
such german blockhouses as came handiest were used for battalion 
and company headquarters while the companies lay out in the wet and 
talked about the prospect of hot meals. they were not very severely 
shelled, but when august 2 broke in heavy rain and the brigade on 
their right continued to send up soss at intervals, thereby obliging 
them to maintain their flank on the railway line, they felt that 
conditions were becoming exceedingly trying, as the diary says. 
then came a relief, which was at least a change. the 1st scots 
guards relieved the two platoons of no. 4 company back in cariboo 
trenches, where the shelling was light and later, as darkness fell, 
set the other companies free to go forward and relieve the 2nd 
grenadiers at the front of things. the changeover took five hours, 
and in the middle of it the brigade on their right once more sent up 
soss, which brought down a german barrage, and necessitated every 
one standing to for developments. it proved a false alarm, and no 
action was taken by the enemyan omission which it is conceivable 
the guards division rather regretted. beyond question that brigade 
had been badly held up among the blockhouses, and had been savagely 
shelled in and out of shellholes that bewilder troops buttill 
their own trouble comesno troops go out of their way to make 
excuses for a nightmare of soss. theres enough fatigues, yell 
understand, when youre out o the line. extra fatigues in action, 
like defensive flanks, is outrageous. 

they were shelled and rained upon throughout the whole of the night 
of the 2nd august, and on the evening of the 3rd, still in ceaseless 
rain, were relieved by the 1st scots guards and marched through 
mud, water and darkness, over broken ground beyond description to 
elverdinghe siding, where they were packed into trucks at five in the 
morning and taken to poll hill camp near bandaghem for training. 

their casualties, all things reckoned, had been very light. they had 
gone into action on the 31st july with 26 officers and 1002 other 
ranks and had lost only 2 officers and 125 other ranks from all 
causes. 

the total casualties for the twelve battalions of the guards division 
in the action had been 59 officers and 18z6 men in two days and rain 
falling without a break for the next four days drowned out the sad 
fight. the enemys line had been pushed back from bixschoote, through 
frezenberg, westhoek, stirling castle, and shrewsbury forest down 
to hollebeke. at that stage our armies, as had happened so often 
on the somme, were immobilised. the clay ground was cullendered and 
punched by the shells into chains of pools and ponds. all valleys 
and hollows turned into bogs where, if men wandered from the regular 
tracks across them, they drowned or were mired to death. if they 
stayed on the plankings the enemys guns swept them away. when all 
had been done that man could do, the first phase of the third battle 
of ypres closed in a strengthened conviction that all the powers of 
evil were in strict alliance with germany. our armies held off seven 
counterattacks along the line, settled themselves in it and then, 
perforce, waited for the weather to clear. 

it rained on and off till the 15th august, and, as most of the corn 
in the fields round poll hill camp had, owing to the wet, not been 
cut, trainingground was limited just at the very time when the new 
german system of holding a line with a chain of carefully camouflaged 
posts called for a change in attack methods. so the battalion was 
practised in surprise situationsi.e. discovering invisible 
enemies with machineguns in shellholes that turned the advancing 
line into a ragged scattering scrum. their dummy barrages were 
slowed, too, as the diary says, to enable the surprise situations 
to be dealt with and to give time for the line to reform behind 
the barrage after having dealt with these situations. this was a 
kind of work for which, like bombing, the irish had considerable 
natural aptitudes. it was summed up, unofficially, thus in the 
ould days, a trench was a trench, yell understand, an something 
to lay hould upon. third ypres was failin into nothin and then 
findin twas two pillboxes an a fort on your flank. therefore, 
the specialists in the shape of the lewisgunner and the mopperup 
who dealt with the dbris of attacks were important persons and were 
instructed accordingly when the battalion was not indented upon for 
workingparties on the guntracks and bridges round boesinghe. 


third ypres and the broembeek 

on august 1 lieutenant the hon. p. j. ogilvy joined the battalion and 
took over no. 1 company from acting captain w. c. mumford, who had 
been appointed town major of the busy and occasionally battered town 
of elverdinghe and lieutenant e. budd took over the 4th company from 
acting captain h. f. da. s. law, wounded. 

on the 15th august, the eve of the langemarck attack, they were 
put on one hours notice, which was withdrawn the next day, when 
six divisions the fortyeighth, eleventh, fiftysixth, eighth, 
twentieth and twentyninth struck again along the line from the 
menin road to our junction with the french in the north. the weather 
once more blinded our aeroplanes so that our artillery could not 
deal effectively with the counterattacks the pillboxes held up 
our infantry, and though prisoners, guns, and a little ground round 
langemarck were gained, the line of the salient from st. julien 
southwards stood as it had since the first. the battalion was 
peacefully at bombpractice on that day, and by some oversight a live 
bomb got mixed up with the dummies, and caused thirteen casualties, 
luckily none of them very serious, and the training went forward. as 
the crops were cut ground was gradually extended and every one was 
worked hard at practice attacks for they understood that their lot 
would be cast in the salient for some time. 

on the 2zth august medal ribbons were presented by the general of 
the 1st brigade to those who had won honour in the boesinghe battle, 
either by their coolheadedness in dealing with surprise situations 
or sheer valour in the face of death or selfdevotion to a comrade 
for there was every form of bravery to choose from. lieutenant e. 
budd received the bar to his military cross, and sergeant ac.s.m. 
p. donohoe no. 3056, no. 1910 sergeant ac.s.m. f. mcusker, no. 
3224 corporal e. mcullagh, no. 42z8 lancecorporal j. vanston, no. 
z520 private s. nulty, no. 52z9 private j. rochford bar to military 
medal, no. 101z1 lancecorporal s. mchale, military medal no. 10161 
lancecorporal w. cooper, d.c.m. 

the following n.c.o.s and men were unable to be present on parade, 
but were awarded honours during the past month. no. 4512 sergeant j. 
balfe, no. 3146 lancecorporal f. coyne, no. 4386 sergeant macdonald, 
no. 60z8 private j. martin, military medal no. 4884 private d. 
obrien, croix de guerre. 

on the last days of august they marched to proven siding and 
entrained for elverdinghe and thence to dulwich camp, well known as 
being somewhat exposed and liable to longrange shellfire. they 
were used at once by the greedy r.e.s for burying cables and making 
artillerytracks preparatory to the next move in the interminable 
third battle of ypres. 

from the 1st to the 4th september they, with the 1st guards brigade, 
were in support to the 3rd guards brigade which was in the line, 
and sent up about half their strength for carryingparties every 
night. the line, swampy and overlooked by the high ground under 
houthulst forest to the north and northeast, consisted of posts in 
shellholesthe shellholes being improved only just sufficiently 
to make them habitable. the standard of comfort in the salient 
at that time was lower than on the somme, where men were dying, 
at least, dry. all posts were elaborately concealed from overhead 
observation, for the enemy aeroplanes roved over them, bombing and 
machinegunning at large. though the battalion was lucky in its four 
days turn, it lost on the night of the 4th september 2nd lieutenant 
g. p. boyd and four men killed and twentythree wounded. some of the 
other battalions in support suffered severely from bombing raids, and 
all backareas were regularly raked over so that the troops might be 
worried by loss of sleep. 

from the 5th to the 8th they lay in rugby camp, in reserve to the 
2nd coldstream and 2nd grenadiers of their own brigade in the front 
line. here they enjoyed a fairly quiet time, and had only to find 
a hundred men or so per night for forwardarea work. rugby, dulwich 
and the other camps were all duly and regularly bombed, shelled and 
gassed, but that was accepted as part of the daily and nightly work. 

on the 9th they were up at the front among the just sufficiently 
habitable shellholes of the green line beyond the iron cross 
kortikaarcabaret road from the ypresstaden railway to the junction 
with the french. their guides met them at bois farm, fifteen hundred 
yards back, and since, once among the holes, all food sent up risked 
the life or mutilation of a man, they carried two days rations and 
picked up their water from a decauville railway that ran to the 
terminus daily bombed and bombarded on the wijden drift road. 
while the last two companies nos. 2 and 4 were getting their 
tins at railhead, an hour and a halfs barrage was dropped on them 
and twentyseven men were killed or wounded. relief was delayed in 
consequence till one on the morning of the 10th, and, about an hour 
later, a wandering covey of eight germans, who had lost their way in 
the dark, were rounded up by the forward platoons of no. 3 company 
2nd lieutenant corry, d.c.m.. it was a small brisk fight, and it 
came pleasantly after the barrage at railhead, and the shelling that 
befell them from three to halfpast five. they were annoyed, too, by 
lowflying enemy aeroplanes who fired at the men in the posts but as 
a rule missed them. a deserter came in and patrols were sent out to 
see where the nearest enemypost might be. one was located near the 
railway line in front of the right company. exploration work of this 
sort in such a blind front as the enemy had arranged here, ends only 
too often in patrols losing their way as the eight germans had done 
and company officers do not like it. 

on the 11th september, after some artillery work on our side, the 
enemy guns carried out a shoot on the pillboxes occupied by the 
right no. 1 company while their infantry were unusually active, 
probably because the thirtyeighth division on the guards right 
was being relieved that night by the twentieth. as a sideissue of 
the fight the battalion on their left was attacked, which, so far 
as the irish guards were concerned, meant that the left company 
no. 2 swiftly manufactured a fresh post on their left to improve 
communication with their neighbours, and prevent the enemy working 
round their flank through the remnants of a wood. in this work they 
had to disperse with riflefire several parties of the enemy who 
might have interfered with their arrangements, and captain t. f. 
macmahon was wounded. this bald record covers a long, tense night of 
alarms and fatigues, and fatigueparties dropping like partridges 
where the barrage found them, to creep forward as soon as it was 
lifted and, somewhere on the left, the crackle and blaze of an 
attack on a battalion which was entirely capable of taking care of 
itself. 

their relief on the night of the 13th by the 1st scots guards was 
very much delayed. two detachments got lost, one through the guide 
being killed and the other through the guide losing himself. yet it 
was a very dark, and, therefore, theoretically a safe, night, with 
very little shellingproof of the utter uncertainty of every detail 
connected with war. 

they had lost in that fortnight one officer 2nd lieutenant boyd 
and fourteen men killed one officer captain t. f. macmahon and 
seventyeight other ranks wounded. for the rest of the month they 
were training in campscariboo and poll hillof which the former 
was not out of reach of shellfire, and studied new methods of attack 
to combat the enemys new methods of defence in his protected and 
fortified shellholes. these he now held in depth, one shellhole 
post covering or flanking the next, so that men fought their way 
up a landscape of miniature redoubts, invisible to guns, almost 
invisible to aeroplanes, and much more expensive to reduce than the 
narrowslotted pillboxes. 

on the 21st september their brigadiergeneral jeffreys saw the 
battalion on parade, near proven, and bade them farewell on his 
promotion to command the nineteenth division. he was succeeded in 
command of the 1st brigade by general c. r. c. de crespigny. on the 
2zth lieut.colonel r. v. pollok commanding the battalion, who had 
been on leave, returned and took over from captain a. f. l. gordon 
acting in his absence. on the 29th lieutenant b. reford who had been 
assistant adjutant took over no. 3 company vice captain t. f. 
macmahon, wounded on the 11th, and 2nd lieutenant t. s. v. stoney 
joined for duty on the 25th. 

among the honours mentioned as awarded to the men that month for 
gallantry and devotion to duty was the d.c.m. to 52z9 private j. 
rochford for gallantry, devotion to duty and organizing ability 
when employed as a stretcherbearer with a workingparty on september 
3, the night when lieutenant boyd and twentyeight men were killed 
or wounded by bombs. this, it may be noted, is that rochford whose 
presence steadied, and whose jests diverted, whole platoons upon the 
somme, and for whose health the men inquired first after the platoon 
or workingparty had been shelled. 

and while they trained, with the utter selfabsorption of men 
concerned in the study of methods of taking mans life, the salient 
heaved and flamed day after day with german counterattacks as 
our guns covered the adjustment and reinforcements and protection 
of artillery troops and material in preparation for the battle of 
september 20. as usual, the weather broke on the eve of it. ten 
divisions nineteenth, thirtyninth, fortyfirst, twentythird, 
first and second australians, ninth, fiftyfifth, fiftyeighth and 
twentieth attacked from near hollebeke in the south to langemarck in 
the north pushed back the line on the whole length of their attack 
gained one mile outwards along the desperate menin road, established 
themselves in polygon wood, broke eleven counterattacks, took over 
3000 prisoners and left as many enemy dead. it was followed up 
on the 26th september by another attack, on a sixmile front from 
south of the menin road to northeast of st. julien, in which six 
divisions thirtyninth, thirtythird, fifth and fourth australians, 
fiftyeighth and fiftyninth once more moved our line forward along 
that frontage, in some places nearly half a mile. our movement 
clashed, almost to the minute, with german counterattacks by fresh 
divisions launched to recover the ground they had lost on the 20th 
september, and the fighting was none the lighter for that coincidence. 

the 3rd october saw the weather break again just as fighting was 
resumed on a sevenmile front from the menin road to the ypresstaden 
railway. twelve divisions went in here the thirtyseventh, fifth, 
twentyfirst, seventh first, second and third australians the new 
zealand fortyeighth, eleventh, fourth and twentyninth. reutel, 
nordemhock, and broodseinde villages were taken, abraham heights 
gained, the gravenstafel spur cleared by the new zealanders three 
fresh german divisions were caught by our guns almost in the act 
of forming up for attack, and 5000 prisoners were passed back. the 
enemys losses here were very satisfactory and mainly due to our 
gunfire. 

on the 5th october, then, so far as the guards division was 
concerned, the line of our working front ran through poelcappelle 
and thence back to the ypresstaden railway at a point some thousand 
yards north of langemarck. from that point it merged into the old 
line gained on the 20th of september which followed the broembeek 
river at a short distance to the south of it, towards our junction 
with the french, and thence lost itself in the flooded areas beyond 
noordschoote. no weight of attack had fallen on that sector of the 
front since september 20 when langemarck had been captured, and the 
french line, with ours, advanced in the direction of draibach and 
houthulst forest. 


the broembeek 

it was decided to renew the attack, in combination with the french 
here, on the 9th october, from northwest of langemarck across the 
ypresstaden railway down to a point in the line gained on the 4th 
october, east of zonnebeke, on a front of six miles. the weather 
prepared itself in advance. rain began punctually on the zth, 
continued through the 8th, and made the going more than usually 
unspeakable. it affected the guards division principally, since 
their share of the work involved crossing the little valley of the 
broembeek river which, should it continue to flood, offered every 
possible opportunity for holding up troops under fire, loss of 
direction since men never move straight across bogs and engulfment 
of material. the broembeek was a stagnant ditch, from twenty to 
thirty feet wide and from two to five deep, edged with shellholes 
and, in some parts, carrying vertical banks four or five feet deep. 
there was, mercifully, no wire in it, but nightpatrols sent out the 
week before the battle of the 9th reported it could not be crossed 
without mats. 

the 1st brigade of the division, which lay in reserve while the 3rd 
brigade held the front line, had trained for several days at poll 
hill camp over ground marked to represent the ground that the 
battalion would have to attack over. the certainty of being drenched 
to the skin on a raw october night as a preliminary to tumbling from 
shellhole to shellhole till dawn between invisible machineguns and 
snipers was left to the imagination of the men. 

on october 6th, the details to be left out of the attack departed 
to join the guards division reinforcement battalion at herzeele. 
men say that the withdrawal of these reprieved ones on the eve of 
action was as curious a sight as the arrival of a draft. for yell 
understand, at that time o the war, men knew twas only putting off 
what was bound to happen. 

then, in foul weather, the battalion entrained for elverdinghe with 
the 3rd coldstream of their brigade. the idea was that the 1st 
brigade de crespignys would attack parallel to the line of the 
ypresstaden railway on their right, about three hundred yards from 
it, the 2nd brigade sergisonbrookes on their left next against 
the french, with the 3rd brigade seymours in support. this last 
brigade had been very heavily used in making arrangements for the 
division to cross the broembeek, piling dumps and helping to haul 
guns into fresh positions through the mud. the furthest objective 
set, for the advance, was the edge of the houthulst forest, three 
thousand yards across semifluid country with no landmarks other 
than the line of smashed rail on their right, and whatever fortified 
houses, farms, pillboxes and shellholes they might encounter during 
their progress. when they had overcome all obstacles, they were 
instructed to dig in on the edge of the forest. 

at 9.30 on the night of the 8th, in heavy rain, the battalion marched 
from abingley camp to their assembly lines these all duly marked 
by tapes and white signboards, which, to the imaginative, suggest 
graveyards from elverdinghe to boesinghe road, up clarges street 
to abri wood, and then to cannes farm till they met the guides 
for their assembly areas at ruisseau farm. from here began the 
interminable duckboards that halt and congest the slowmoving line 
and it was not till four in the morning that the battalion was formed 
up and moved off. the rain had stopped a little before midnight and 
a late moon came to their help. 

the companies were commanded as follows no. 1, captain the hon. p. 
j. ogilvy no. 2, lieutenant d. s. browne no. 3, captain r. b. s. 
reford no. 4, lieutenant n. b. bagenal. 

there was some shelling as they got into their assembly positions 
at 5.20 a. m., but casualties were few. the 2nd grenadiers and 2nd 
coldstream led off under a few minutes blast of intense fire from 
fieldguns and stokes mortars, crossed the broembeek and were away. 
at 6.20 the 1st irish guards and 3rd coldstream followed them. the 
battalions crossingplace at the river, which, after all, proved 
not so unmanageable as the patrols reported, had no bridges, but 
there was wire enough on the banks to have made trouble had the enemy 
chosen that time and place to shell. they went over in threefoot 
water with mud at the bottom reformed, wet and filthy, and followed 
the 2nd grenadiers who had captured the first and second objectives, 
moved through them at 8.20 and formed up on the right of the 3rd 
coldstream under the barrage of our guns for their own advance on the 
final objectivethe edge of the forest. 

so far, barring a tendency to bear towards the right or railway side, 
direction had been well kept and their losses were not heavy. the 
companies deployed for attack on the new lines necessitated by the 
altered german system of defensemoppingup sections in rear of the 
leading companies, with lewisgun sections, and a moppingup platoon 
busy behind all. 

meantime, the troops on the battalions right had been delayed in 
coming up, and their delay was more marked from the second objective 
onward. this did not check the guards advance, but it exposed the 
battalions right to a cruel flanking fire from snipers among the 
shellholes on the uncleared ground by the ypresstaden line. there 
were pillboxes of concrete in front there was a fortified farm 
buried in sandbags, egypt house, to be reduced there were nests 
of machineguns on the right which the troops on the right had not 
yet overrun, and there was an almost separate and independent fight 
in and round some brickfields, which, in turn, were covered by 
the fire of snipers from the fringes of the forest. enemy aircraft 
skimming low gave the german artillery every help in their power, 
and the enemys shelling was accurate accordingly. the only thing 
that lacked in the fight was the bayonet. the affair resolved 
itself into a series of splashing rushes, from one shellhole to 
the next, terrierwork round the pillboxes, incessant demands for 
the lewisguns riflegrenades, but no bombs, were employed except 
by the regular bombing sections and moppersup who cleared the 
underground shelters, and the hardest sort of personal attention 
from the officers and n.c.o.s. all four companies reached the final 
objective mixed up together and since their right was well in the 
air, by the reason of the delay of the flanking troops, they had 
to make a defensive flank to connect with a battalion of the next 
division that came up later. it was then that they were worst sniped 
from the shellholes, and the casualties among the officers, who had 
to superintend the forming of the flank, were heaviest. there was not 
much shelling through the day. they waited, were sniped, and expected 
a counterattack which did not come off, though in the evening the 
enemy was seen to be advancing and the troops on the battalions 
right fell back for a while, leaving their flank once more exposed. 
their position at the time was in a somewhat awkward salient, and 
they readjusted themselvesalways under sniping firedug in again 
as much as wet ground allowed, and managed in the dark to establish 
connection with a battalion of hampshires that had come up on their 
right. 

they spent the night of the 9th october where they lay, in the 
front line, while the enemy sniped them, shelled their supports, 
or put down sudden wandering barrages from front to back. every 
company commander had been killed or wounded during the day their 
medical officer captain p. r. woodhouse, m.c. was wounded at duty 
on the 10th, the men were caked with mud and ooze, worn to their 
last nerves and badly in need of food and hot drinks. there was 
no infantry action on their front, however, throughout the 10th, 
and in the evening they were relieved by two companies of the 1st 
grenadiers the other two companies of that battalion relieving the 
2nd grenadiers in the supportline. the battle, which counted as a 
successful minor operation in the great schemes of the third battle 
of ypres, had cost them four officers killed in action on the 9th, 
one died of wounds on the 11th, seven officers and their doctor 
wounded in the two days fortyseven other ranks killed one hundred 
and fiftyeight wounded, and ten missing among the horrors of the 
swampy pitted ground. the list runs 

  capt. the hon. p. j. ogilvy  
  capt. r. j. p. rodakowski    
  2nd lieut. a. l. wells       killed october 9. 
  2nd lieut. t. s. v. stoney   
  2nd lieut. h. v. fanshawe     died 11th october of 
                                wounds received on 
                                the 9th. 

  capt. r. b. s. reford    
  lieut. n. b. bagenal     
  lieut. d. s. browne      wounded october 9th. 
  2nd lieut. e. m. harvey  
  2nd lieut. t. corry      

  capt. p. r. woodhouse    
  lieut. h. h. maxwell     wounded october 10th. 
  2nd lieut. e. h. dowler  

it took them eight hours along the taped tracks and the duckboards 
to get to rugby camp behind boesinghe, where they stayed for the 
next two days and drew a couple of officers and a hundred men from 
the divisional reinforcement battalion to replace some of their 
casualties. 

on the 13th october they, with their brigade, took over the support 
line on the old battlefront from various units of the 2nd and 3rd 
guards brigade. the 2nd grenadiers relieved the 1st grenadiers 
in the front line on the right and the 2nd coldstream the welsh 
guards on the left sector. the battalion itself was scattered by 
companies and halfcompanies near koekuitlouvois farm, craonne 
farm, and elsewhere, relieving companies and halfcompanies of the 
other battalions, and standing by to attend smartly to the needs 
of the forward battalions in case of sudden calls for more bombs, 
smallarm ammunition, and lights. they were instructed, too, to be 
ready to support either flank should the troops there give way. 
but the troops did not give way and they had nothing worse to 
face than heavy shelling of the supports at night and the work of 
continuing the duckboardtracks across the mud. most of the men 
were accommodated in shellholes and small, shallow trenches, 
for water stopped the spade at a couple of feet below ground but 
where anything usable remained of the german pillboxes, which 
smelt abominably, the men were packed into them. it was in no way a 
pleasant tour, for the dead lay thick about, and men had not ceased 
speaking of their officers of the week beforeintimately, lovingly, 
and humorously as the irish used to do. 

more than most, the advance on houthulst forest had been an officers 
battle for their work had been broken up, by the nature of the 
ground and the position of the german pillboxes, into detached 
parties dealing with separate strong points, who had to be collected 
and formed again after each bout had ended. but this work, conceived 
and carried out on the spur of the moment, under the wings of death, 
leaves few historians. 

they were relieved on the 16th october by the 20th lancashire 
fusiliers of the 104th brigade on their right, returned to 
elverdinghe through boesinghe, and entrained for a peaceful camp at 
proven. during their three days tour, lieutenant r. h. s. grayson 
and fourteen other ranks were wounded, mainly by shell and two other 
ranks were killed. 

they had begun the month of october with 28 officers and 1081 other 
ranks. they had lost in sixteen days 252 other ranks and 14 officers 
killed or wounded. now they were free for the time to rest, refit, 
and reorganise in readiness, men said, to be returned to the somme. 
yell understand that, in those days, we had grand choice of the 
fryinpan or the fire. 


the return to the somme and cambrai 

the salient, with its sense of being ever overlooked and constricted 
on every side, fairly represents the fryingpan the broad, general 
conflagration of the somme, the fire. they quitted the fryingpan 
with some relief, entrained at proven with the 3rd coldstream and 
the 1st brigade machinegun company, detrained at watten between 
the bois du ham and the fort deperlecques, beyond st. omer, and 
marched to the pleasant village of bayenghemleseperlecques, where 
they had the satisfaction of meeting the 6th border regiment just 
marching out of the billets that they were to occupy. the place was 
an intensive trainingcamp, specialising in all the specialties, but 
musketry above all. the somme was open country, where, since they had 
left it, multitudes of tanks had come into use for the protection 
of troops, and troops thus protected do not need so many bombers to 
clear out shellholes as they do in the salient, where tanks stick 
and are shelled to bits in the mud. the inference was obvious they 
enjoyed compulsory and voluntary musketry, varied with inspections 
and routemarchings. 

on the 21st october his royal highness the duke of connaught visited 
them as senior colonel of the brigade of guards, was introduced to 
all the officers, spoke to most of the n.c.o.s and the men who 
had been decorated during the war. the battalion was formed up in 
walking out order in the streets of the village to receive him. it 
is alleged by survivors that the sergeants saw to it that never since 
the irish guards had been formed was there such rigorous inspection 
of walking out men before they fell in. we looked like all 
birdcage walk of a sunday. 

on the 24th there joined for duty a draft of six officers, major 
r. r. c. baggallay, m.c., lieutenant g. k. thompson, m.c., and 2nd 
lieutenants c. e. hammond, f. g. de stacpoole, t. a. carey, and e. c. 
g. lord. lieutenant d. j. b. fitzgerald was transferred from the 1st 
to the 2nd battalion on the twentyfifth, which was the day chosen 
for an inspection of the whole division by sir douglas haig, in cold 
weather with a high wind. 

on the 6th november general antoine, commanding the first french army 
corps, which had lain on the divisions left at boesinghe, was to 
present french medals gained by the division, but, thanks to the wet, 
parade, after being drawn up and thereby thoroughly drenched, was 
dismissed and the medals presented without review. lieut.colonel r. 
v. pollok, commanding the battalion, received the croix de guerre. 
it is all a piece with human nature that the miseries of a week in 
liquid mud among corpses should be dismissed with a jest, but a 
wet parade, which ruins three or four hours careful preparation, 
regarded as a grievous burden for every one except the n.c.o.s, who, 
by tradition are supposed to delight in fatigues of this order. 

their three weeks training came to an end on the 11th november, 
when they moved thirteen miles, in torrents of rain, to the village 
of ecques, which was filled with portuguese troops, and began a long 
march. they did not know their destination, but guessed well where 
they were going. 

some had all the reasons in the world to know that the division would 
relieve the french on half a dozen different named sectors. others 
were certain that it would attack independently quite elsewhere. 
even italy, where the caporetto disaster had just taken place, was 
to the imaginative quite within the bounds of luck. but their line 
of routetwelve or thirteen miles a day in fine weatherdropped 
always south and east. from ecques it crossed the lys at throuanne 
held over the worn road between st. pol and bthune, till, at 
magnicourtlecomte, came orders that all kits were to be reduced 
and sent in to st. pol. elaborate reasons were given for this, such 
as lack of transport owing to troops being hurried to italy, which 
dissipated the idea of light wines and macaroni entertained by the 
optimists, and deceived no one. if they turned left when they struck 
the st. polarras road, it would not be the french whom they were 
relieving. if they held on south, it would be the old somme ground. 
and they held on south to beaufort, marching by daylight, till the 
18th of october found them in a camp of huts outside blaireville and 
well in the zone of aeroplane observation. they moved under cover of 
darkness that night to a camp of tents at gomiecourt between wrecked 
bapaume and battered arras. 

the bare devastated downs of the somme had taken them back again, 
and they were in the fifth corps, third julian byngs army. it 
was revealed at divisional headquarters conference on the night of 
the 19th that that army was on the eve of attack. there would be 
no preliminary bombardments, but an outrush of tanks, with a dozen 
infantry divisions on a sixmile front from gonnelieu to the canal du 
nord near hermies. 

the affair might be a surprise for an enemy whom our pressure on 
the salient had forced to withdraw a large number of troops from 
the somme front. if the tanks worked well, it ought to result in 
the breaking through of the tripletrench system of the hindenburg 
line, which had been immensely strengthened by the germans since 
their leisurely retirement thither in april. we might expect to 
push on across their reserve system three or four miles behind the 
hindenburg line. we might even capture cambrai twelve thousand yards 
from our jumpingoff place, though that would be a sideissue but, 
with luck, our attack would win us more high ground towards the 
north and the northeast, whence we could later strike in whichever 
direction seemed most profitable. secrecy and hardhitting would 
be of the essence of the contract, since the enemy could bring up 
reinforcements in a couple of days. meantime the guards division 
would stand by at two hours notice, ready to be used as required. 
if cambrai were taken, they would be called upon to hold it and 
make good. if it were not, then the battle would rank as a raid 
on a big scale, and the division might be used for anything that 
developed. that same day major baggallay, m.c., carried out a road 
reconnaissance of the front at doignies and demicourt north of 
havrincourt wood. the situation there betrayed nothing. apparently 
the whole of that frontsector was habitually very quiet. 

twentyfour hours later, it was alive and roaring with our tanks 
rooting through the massed wire of the hindenburg line, the clamour 
of halfadozen divisions launched at their heels and the smashing 
fire of our guns in advance of them and their covering smokescreens 
while far to the north and south dummy attacks, gas and artillery 
demonstrations veiled and confused either flank. the opening day was, 
beyond doubt, a success. the german line went out under the tanks, 
as breakwaters go out under the race of a tide and from gonnelieu 
to north of hermies three systems of their defence were overrun to 
a depth of four or five miles. by the 21st november our attack had 
punched out a squareheaded salient, ten miles across the base, the 
southerly side of which ran along the high ground of the bonavis 
ridge, more or less parallel to the st. quentinescaut canal from 
gonnelieu to masnires, which latter place we held. the easterly 
side lay from masnires through noyellessurlescaut and cantaing 
to fontainenotredame and bourlon wood. this latter, as the highest 
point of command, was the key of the position on our north flank. 
thence, the northerly flank of the salient ran roughly westward from 
the wood, south of muvres till it joined our original front north of 
boursies. about one half of the salient was commanded by german guns 
from the north of bourlon wood, and the other half from the south in 
the direction of the bonavis ridge. 

besides these natural disadvantages there were large numbers of our 
cavalry hopefully disposed on the main routes in readiness for the 
traditional breakthrough, the harrying of enemy communications, 
etc. november on the somme is not, however, quite the best season for 
exploits of horse, sabre and lance. 

meantime, the battalion spent the 20th november, and till the evening 
of the 21st, at two hours notice in camp near barastre, and on the 
23rd november moved to bivouac just west of the village of doignies 
behind demicourt on the edge of the habitually very quiet sector 
before mentioned. the 1st and 3rd brigades guards division had been 
detailed to relieve two brigades of the fiftyfirst division in the 
line attacking fontainenotredame village at the extreme north tip 
of the salient a dozen miles away and on the evening of the 23rd 
november they received verbal orders to get away from doignies. at 
the moment the battalion was moving off, came written orders that the 
whole of its firstline transport should accompany it so a verbal 
order was sent to the transport officer to bring it on in rear of the 
brigade column. that was the beginning of some not too successful 
staff work and some unnecessary wanderings in the dark, complicated 
by the congestion of the roads and the presence of the everhopeful 
cavalry. the battalion, its transport all abroad, crossed the canal 
du nord from doignies and waited by the roadside till lieut.colonel 
follett, commanding the brigade, rode into graincourt, picked up 
guides from the 152nd brigade, brought on the battalion another 
couple of thousand yards to the crossroads at la justice, found 
fresh guides from the gordons and argyll and sutherland highlanders 
and moved downhill straight into line at cantaing mill after a good 
and quiet relief, at 3.20 a. m. on the morning of the 24th. fighting 
had been going on day and night since the 20th for the possession 
of bourlon wood and village, where the fortieth division had been 
worn to a skeleton in alternate attack and counterattack, but there 
was no trouble that dawn or day on the cantaing sector where the 
battalion lay and listened to the roar of the battle a mile and a 
half to the north. their concern was to improve their line and find 
out where on earth the staff had lost their firstline transport. 
it appeared that varying orders had been given to the transport for 
the different battalions, complicated by general instructions to 
follow their own units by the light of nature and there the orders 
stopped. naturally, as the roads boiled with traffic, all transport 
was promptly stood aside to let troops get ahead, with the result 
that after many adventures in the dark, including the collapse of a 
bridge over the canal du nord when half the loads had crossed, the 
battalions transport got into ribecourt at five in the morning, 
still without any orders, found that no one knew where brigade 
headquarters might be, billeted themselves in a wrecked farm and 
managed to get into touch with their battalion in the afternoon of 
the 24th. about this time, the fortieth division with the tanks 
attacked bourlon village, captured the whole of it, only to be fought 
out by the enemy on the following day. the wood had not at that time 
gained its dark name in history. all that the waiting battalion at 
cantaing reports on the 25th november, while wood and village fumed 
like the infernos that they were, is no fighting on the battalion 
front, although there was heavy fighting on the left. 

it broke out again on the 26th towards evening the fifth day of 
continuous battle, when the 4th grenadiers of the 3rd guards brigade 
were sent up to support the fortieth division and, on the way 
thither, went through a heavy german barrage as though they were on 
parade. 

but the high ground above bourlon wood and fontainenotredame gave 
the enemy an artillery and observation command which enabled them to 
sweep our front and back areas in the northern half of the salient 
almost as they chose. pressure, too, was beginning to develop on 
the flanks. the fortyeight hours in which the enemy could bring up 
fresh troops had grown to nearly a week, and they had used every hour 
of it. in no way could the situation be called healthy, but were 
the bourlon ridges won, at least our gain of ground might be held. 
so it was decided that the 2nd guards brigade, 3rd grenadiers, 1st 
coldstream, 2nd irish guards and 1st scots guards, together with the 
4th grenadiers and the welsh guards borrowed, should on the 2zth 
attack fontaine village and bourlon wood. they did so attack they 
were cut to pieces with machinegun fire in the advance they were 
shelled out of bourlon wood they were counterattacked by heavy 
reinforcements of the enemy they had no reinforcements they fell 
back on fontaine village in the evening they withdrew from it in 
the darkness and fell back on la justice. it was a full failure 
with heavy casualties and the news went back, with the speed of all 
bad news, to the 1st brigade, which had been relieved on the 26th, 
the 1st irish guards lying at ribecourt in the ruined farm where 
their transport had taken refuge. they should have been in a trench 
outside the village, but a battalion of another division was found in 
possession of it, and so was not disturbed. 


gouzeaucourt 

there was no shelter against the driving snowy rain, and the men, 
without greatcoats or blankets, were very cold, wet and miserable. 
the next day was no better, and on the 29th the fiftyninth 
division took over their area from them while the guards division 
was rearranged thus the 3rd brigade at trescault, the 2nd at 
ribecourt, and the 1st at metzencouture, a wrecked, redbrick 
village, once engaged in the sugarbeet industry, lying on and under 
a swell of the downs some four thousand yards west of gouzeaucourt. 
the divisional artillery was at flesquires, more than four miles 
away. the battalions march to metz was badly delayed by blocks on 
the road and a general impression spread that trouble was not far 
off. individually, the soldier is easy to deceive collectively, a 
battalion has the sure instinct of an animal for changes in the wind. 
there were catacombs in metz village where one company was billeted 
whereby it was nearly choked to death by foul gases.8 this seemed 
all of a piece with the bad luck of the tour, and the dawn of the 
30th november was ushered in by single shells from a longrange gun 
which found them during the night. half an hour after they had the 
order to move to heudicourt and had digested a persistent rumour that 
the enemy were through at gonnelieu, telegrams and orders began to 
pour in. the gist of them was that the line had undoubtedly cracked, 
and that the brigade would move to gouzeaucourt at once. but what 
the brigade was to do, and under whose command it was to operate, 
were matters on which telegrams and orders most livelily conflicted. 
eventually, the division as a whole was assigned to the third corps, 
the 3rd brigade was ordered to come up from trescault and help the 
1st, and the various c.o.s of the battalions of the 1st brigade rode 
forward to see for themselves what was happening. they had not far 
to go. over the ridge between gouzeaucourt and metz poured gunners, 
carrying their sights with them, engineers, horses and infantry, all 
apparently bent on getting into the village where they would be a 
better target for artillery. the village choked the battalion fell 
in, clear of the confusion, where it best could, and set off at once 
in artillery formation, regardless of the stragglers, into the high 
and bare lands round gouzeaucourt. there were no guns to back them, 
for their own were at flesquires. 

as was pointed out by an observer of that curious daytis 
little ye can do with gunsights, an them in the arrums av men in 
a great haste. there was men with blankets round em, an men with 
loose putties wavin in the wind, and they told us twas a general 
retirement. we could see that. we wanted to know for why they was 
returnin. we went through em all, fairly breastin our way andwe 
found jerry on the next slope makin prisoners of a labour corps 
with picks an shovels. but some of that same labour corps they took 
their picks an shovels and came on with us. 

they halted and fixed bayonets just outside gouzeaucourt wood, the 
irish on the left of the line, their right on the metzgouzeaucourt 
road, the 3rd coldstream in the centre, the 2nd coldstream on the 
right, the 2nd grenadiers in reserve in gouzeaucourt wood itself. 
what seems to have impressed men most was the extreme nakedness 
of the landscape, and, at first, the absence of casualties. they 
were shelled as they marched to the wood but not heavily but when 
they had passed beyond it they came under machinegun fire from the 
village. they topped the rise beyond the wood near queens cross and 
were shelled from st. quentin ridge to the east. they overran the 
remnant of one of our trenches in which some sappers and infantry 
were still holding on. dismounted cavalry appeared out of nowhere in 
particular, as troops will in a mixed fray, and attached themselves 
to the right of the thin line. as they swept down the last slope to 
gouzeaucourt the machinegun fire from the village grew hotter on 
their right, and the leading company, characteristically enough, 
made in towards it. this pulled the battalion a little to the right, 
and off the road which was supposed to be their left boundary, but 
it indubitably helped to clear the place. the enemy were seen to be 
leaving in some haste, and only a few of them were shot or bayoneted 
in and out among the houses. the battalion pushed in through the 
village to the slope east of it under quentin mill, where they 
dug in for the night. their left flank was all in the air for a 
while, but the 3rd brigade, which had been originally ordered to 
come up on the right of the 1st, was diverted to the left on the 
gouzeaucourtvillersplouich line, and they got into touch with the 
4th grenadiers. there was no attempt to counterattack. tanks were 
used on the right during the action, but they do not seem to have 
played any material part in the battalions area, and, as the light 
of the short and freezing november day closed, a cavalry regiment or 
some cavalry came up on the left flank. 

the actual stroke that recovered gouzeaucourt had not taken more than 
an hour, but the day had cost them a hundred and thirty men killed, 
wounded, and missing lieutenant n. f. durant killed, lieutenant 
acting captain joyce, lieutenant g. e. f. van der noot, lieutenant 
g. k. thompson, m.c., and 2nd lieutenant p. m. riley wounded. all the 
casualties were from machinegun fire men dropping at the corners of 
streets, across thresholds in cellars and in the angles of wrecked 
walls that, falling on them, hid them for ever. 

a profane legend sprang up almost at once that the zeal shown by the 
guards in the attack was because they knew gouzeaucourt held the 
supplies of the division which had evacuated it. the enemy had been 
turned out before he could take advantage of his occupation. indeed, 
a couple of our supplytrains were found untouched on rail at the 
station, and a number of our guns were recaptured in and around the 
place. also, the divisional rumsupply was largely intact. when this 
fact came to light, as it didso to sayrumjar by rumjar, borne 
joyously through the dark streets that bitter night, the brigade 
was refreshed and warmed, and, men assert, felt almost grateful to 
the division which had laid this extra fatigue on them. one grim 
incident stays in the minds of those who survivedthe sight of an 
enormous irishman urging two captives, whom he had himself unearthed 
from a cellar, to dance before him. he demanded the jigs of his 
native land, and seemed to think that by giving them drink his pupils 
would become proficient. men stood about and laughed till they could 
hardly stand and when the fun was at its height a chance shell out 
of the darkness to the eastward wiped out all that tangoclass before 
their eyes. twas like a dhream, yell understand. one minute 
both jerries was dancin hard to oblige him, an thennothin, 
nothinnothinof the three of them 

the next day, orders came for the guards division to continue their 
work and attack on a front of two miles along the line of the ridge 
a thousand yards east of gouzeaucourt, which ran south through 
gonnelieu village and gauche wood to villers hill. tanks, they 
were told, would help and the divisional artillery would put down 
barrages. the fiftyninth division would be on their left and the 
cavalry division on their right. the 1st guards brigade were assigned 
gauche wood the 3rd brigade had the much more difficult problem of 
rushing gonnelieu village in the event of another division who were 
attacking it that morning 1st december failing to make headway. 
the 1st brigades attack on gauche wood was undertaken by the 2nd 
grenadiers on the right, the 3rd coldstream, in reserve, in their 
trenches. they assembled before dawn on the 1st december, waited a 
while for a promised detachment of tanks and finally started off 
without them. their artillery support was meagre, and the troops had 
to cover threequarters of a mile over grassy land to the fringe 
of the wood. the enemys first barrage fell behind them the wood 
itself was crammed with much more effective machineguns, but, once 
it had been entered, the issue became a mantoman affair. then 
some tanks turned up and some cavalry, the latter an hour late. the 
tanks were eventually withdrawn, as they found no trenches to crush 
in the wood and drew much shellfire in the open but the cavalry, 
which included bengal lancers, were of good use on the right flank 
of the attack. the two guards brigades, one attacking gonnelieu to 
the north, the other gauche wood to the south, drew a little apart 
from each other as the men closed in where the machinegun fire 
was hottest, and about nine oclock the 1st irish guards sent up a 
company no. 1 to fill the gap which developed on both sides of the 
gouzeaucourtgonnelieu road, the boundary between the brigades. 

they do not seem to have been called upon to do more than sit, suffer 
and be shelled till evening, when they were relieved by a company of 
the 1st coldstream and went back in the hard black frost to their 
bivouac in gouzeaucourt wood. gauche wood was won and held, but 
gonnelieu, its houses and cellarages crammed with machineguns, was 
a hopeless proposition from the first, to troops lacking tanks or 
adequate artillery aid. the sole excuse for attempting it was that 
the enemys pressure was heavy and increasing on all three sides of 
the cambrai salient bourlon wood in the north was the point of most 
actual danger and had to be met by whatever offered at the times 
and near the places. the 3rd brigade was held up by the inevitable 
machinegun in trenches in front of gonnelieu and round the cemetery 
on its eastern outskirts and there it stayed, under circumstances of 
extreme misery, till the 3rd december, when the 1st brigade came back 
from gouzeaucourt wood to relieve. the 1st irish guards, numbering, 
then, four hundred and fifty battlestrength, who took over the 
2nd scots guards and half the 1st grenadiers line, were allotted 
what might be termed mixed samples of trench. no. 1 company, for 
instance, held six hundred yards of superior wired line, evidently 
an old british reserve line, with the enemy dug in sixty yards away. 
no. 3 company on its right had a section mostly battered to bits and, 
further weakened by an old communicationtrench running up to the 
enemy, which had to be blocked as soon as possible. no. 2 company 
was even less happily placed for the enemy inhabited the actual 
continuation of their trench, so that they worked with their right 
flank grossly exposed. two platoons of no. 4 company lay close behind 
no. 2 to cover a gap while the other two platoons in flag ravine, 
four or five hundred yards back, by the railwayline, were all the 
reserve the battalion possessed east of gouzeaucourt wood. by some 
unexplained mercy of providence that night, the next day and the 
next days night were quiet in the sense that there was no actual 
attack. the men sat in the trenches and froze for the frost held 
day and night, and the enemy shelled the line at their will, with 
trenchmortars from near at hand and heavier stuff from the ridges 
beyond. just before dawn, on the 5th december, they put down a very 
heavy mixed barrage behind the front line and a trenchmortar one 
on the line itself, and then attacked the two weak spotsno. 2 and 
no. 3 companys positionwith armoured bombers. the barricade to 
the communicationtrench of no. 3 company was blown in by a direct 
mortarhit and a rush followed. no. 2 companys trench was also 
rushed endon from the right, and three or four bays of it were 
taken. at this point, the irish left the trenches all filling with 
the enemy, got out into the open, where for the moment there was 
no mortarfire, and dealt with the invaders from outside, bombing 
and shooting downwards into the heavilymoving queues. the germans 
wore their packs, from which it may be inferred, says the diary 
delicately, that they meant to occupy our trenches. this, and 
their scientific armour, proved their undoing, and whenpresumably 
to make doubly surean infantry attack swarmed out in two lines 
from gonnelieu, it was broken up by our rifle and machinegun fire, 
till it turned round and fled. hereupon, says the diary, they were 
heavily bombed by their own side, presumably as an example to his 
majestys guards of prussian discipline. the casualties in the 
battalion were one officer, 2nd lieutenant carey, and four other 
ranks killed and about thirty wounded, mainly by bombs and mortars. 
but the affair was wastework on both sides for gonnelieu was never 
taken by our arms. our line here, in the next day or so, fell back 
on gauche wood and of all the salient won at the battle of cambrai 
between the 20th and the 23rd of november, all that remained by 
the zth of december was a stretch of country perhaps four thousand 
yards deep running from the gouzeaucourtcambrai road to north of 
demicourt. on the other hand, a cantle had been taken out of our 
old front line from opposite vendhuille to gonnelieu. but in the 
area that we held lay a sample of the great hindenburg line with 
its supportsystems, its tenfootdeep concreted and camouflaged 
trenches, covered gunways, machinegun wells and shafts, and the 
whole detail of its immensely advertised impregnability. men saw it 
with their own eyes, explored its recesses wonderingly, followed down 
the terrible lanes that the tanks had cut in its hundredyarddeep 
beltings of wire, and settled themselves thankfully in its secure 
dugouts, not foreseeing the days next spring when they would be 
swept out of it all like withered leaves. cambrai was no success, but 
it would be unjust to hold it, as some wearied and overwrought souls 
did, an unrelieved failure. the enemy had not achieved their purpose, 
which was to cut off all our troops in the salient, and were quite 
willing to break away and wait till the transfer of fresh divisions 
from the collapsed russian front should be methodically completed. 
we, on our part, were equally ready to cut our losses, for we had no 
men to spare. the guards division was moved out of the battlearea 
on the 6th december, being relieved by troops of the ninth division. 
on the evening of their own private battle the battalion handed over 
their none too pleasant trenches to the 5th cameron highlanders, and 
went back to bivouac in gouzeaucourt wood after a very good relief, 
which drew from the diary the tribute that the camerons were a fine 
battalion. had they been an hour late, in that cutting wind across 
the slopes, a cohort of angels with fiery swords would have been put 
down as hopeless 

they moved from the wood next day to etricourt down the long road 
through fins, and at etricourt entrained for beaumetzlesloges on 
the arrasdoullens road which they reached late at night, cold and 
empty, and were not billeted at berneville, two or three kilometres 
to the northeast, till midnight. they had lost, in november and 
december, two officers killed lieutenant n. f. durant on the 30th 
november, who had joined on the 1st of that month, and 2nd lieutenant 
t. a. carey, killed on the 5th december, joined on the 24th october. 
the average expectation of an officers life in those days on the 
somme was still about six weeks, though some were so lucky they 
survived for months. four officers had been wounded in the same 
period lieutenants g. k. thompson, lieutenant acting captain 
joyce g. e. f. van der noot, and 2nd lieutenant p. m. riley, all 
on the 30th november. the following officers joined in november and 
december lieutenants zigomala, b. f. crewdson, d. j. b. fitzgerald 
and j. n. ward and 2nd lieutenants h. a. a. collett, a. w. g. 
jamrack and c. a. j. nicholson. 

at beaumetzlesloges they lay till the end of the year, cleaning 
up, refitting, drilling, and not forgetting their footballthe 
2nd scots guards beat them in the third round of the divisional 
football competition at arrasor their company christmas dinners. 
these were the fourth that the battalion had eaten within sound of 
the weary guns, but if any one had told them that their next would 
be celebrated in stately steamheated barracks at cologne, hospital 
would have been his portion. they could not have been called happy 
or hopeful at that time for they knew, as all our armies did, that 
the years gain had been small, and the work ahead of them, now that 
the german divisions, released from russia were pouring westward, 
would be heavy. but for the moment they were free of the somme and 
its interminable duckboards that led men to death or hard work its 
shellholes floored with icy snowwater, the gravelike chill of its 
chalk trenches, and the lifesapping damps of the uplands on which 
they had lain out from nights till mornings. 

here is a memory of those days presented by the teller as a jest. 
aye gouzeaucourt and gonnelieu im not like to forget em. i was 
back from leave, yell understand no more anxious to die than the 
rest of us. an there was some new men, toonew young lads just come 
over. my kit was all new, too, me bein back from leave. our c.s.m. 
dhrew me attention to it one of those merry nights we was poachin 
about in no mans land. tis a pity, says he, ye did not bring 
the band from caterham also, says he. twould have amused jerry. 
my new kit was shqueakin an clicking the way they could have heard 
it a mile. aye, gouzeaucourt an the trenches outside gonnelieu 
jerry was usin trenchmortars at his pleasure on us those nights. 
they was crackin on our heads, yell understand. an i was in a bay 
with two men. wan was a new young man, an the trenchmortars was 
new to him. cowld? it was all of that an jerry crackin this dam 
trench mortarstuff of his on our heads at will. it put the wind up 
me did i tell you the other man in the bay was dead he was. that 
finished me new young man. he kep trying to make himself smaller an 
smaller against the trenchmortars. in the end of it, he laced his 
arrums round his ankleshe didan rocked to an fro, whishperin 
to the saints. shellshock? oh, yes, twas all that. presintly i 
heard mr.  comin the rounds, walking outside the trench. ye see 
more where yere outside a trench, but tis no place im fond of 
without orders. an are ye all cozy down there, sergeant? says he. 
yes, cosy was his word knowin him well, why wud we not be cosy, 
sorr? says i, an at that he dhrops into the bay to have a look. we 
was cosy enough, all three of usthe dead man dead an stiffenin 
in the frost, an this fine new young lad of ours embracin his own 
ankles an rockin back an forth, an me so sorry my leave was 
up. oh we was the cosiest party in the whole dam front line that 
night and for to make it all the cosier, my new young man, as soon 
as he set eyes on mr. , he flung his arrums around his neck, an 
he let out a yell, an he hugged him like a gurrl. i had to separate 
em ive laughed at it since, an so did mr.  an, begad, i 
remember laughin at it at the time. ay, cosy, mr.  said. that 
was the word so i laughed. otherwise there was not much laughin, 
yell understand, at gouzeaucourt an them cosy trenches before 
gonnelieu. 




1918 

arras to the armistice 


the lull lasted till the 2nd of january when they marched via 
warlus to arras and were billeted in the prison there. battalion 
headquarters were in a luxurious house in the rue damiens, with a 
whole roof and all windows repaired with canvas. it was hard frosty 
weather, binding everything tightof the kind that must be paid for 
when thaw comes. 

at that moment our line, on the somme side, ran from lens just behind 
oppy, through rux, five miles east of arras, south to bullecourt, 
southeasterly towards boursies, round the flesquiresribecourt 
salient that cambrai fight had won for us, curved back between 
gonnelieu and gouzeaucourt, and thence dropped, skirting st. quentin 
and the valley of the oise, to the junction with the french at 
barisis, south of that river. this length, of close on seventy miles, 
was held, from barisis to gouzeaucourt, by byngs third army, and 
from gouzeaucourt to gavrelle, by goughs fifth army. north of this, 
the first army took on. the working and reserve strength of the third 
and fifth armies at the opening of 1918 was twentynine infantry 
and three cavalry divisions. so far as our arms were concerned, 
everything on the french and belgian fronts was at a standstill. 
the somme had cost very heavily throughout the year, and there was, 
or was said to be, a scarcity of men. the situation appears to have 
been met by reducing the number of battalions in the brigades from 
four to three apiece. this released the odd battalions to make what, 
on paper, and in the journals, looked like additional brigades, but 
threw extra work, which nowhere appeared as news, on the whole of 
the army administration in the field. sir douglas haigs despatches 
refer guardedly to the reorganization, which he hints to some 
extent affected the fighting efficiency of the units concerned. the 
sentiments of commanders more directly concerned were, perhaps, less 
publishable for it rarely improves an old army in the field to lace 
it at the last moment, before a general attack, with new brigades 
composed of battalions suddenly disassociated from the units with 
whom they have been working. but thus was created the fourth guards 
brigade, by lopping off the 4th grenadiers, the 2nd irish guards, 
and the 3rd coldstream from their respective brigades, and attaching 
them to the thirtyfirst division. further, it was necessary for 
the british armies to take over another stretch of nearly thirty 
miles from the french on the rightapproximately from barisis to 
vendhuille on the oiseand this brought the british front up to one 
hundred and twentyfive miles total length. 

our enemy lay less under such burdens. his released divisions, 
aeroplanes, and guns were decently entraining from the russian front, 
and arriving on the somme in good order, a fact of which our staff, 
and in a very short time all our armies, were perfectly aware. we 
could feel jerry pilin up and pilin up against us in those days, 
yell understand. so, as may have been pointed out, every one 
stood by to prepare for the worst. the guards division, now of nine 
battalions, instead of twelve, was assigned to the defences before 
arras, the hinge on which the coming trouble might be expected to 
turn. their trench and post system ran north and south across the 
scarpe with its lagoon and marshes, by ruxall old and much used 
ground, but which had the advantage of being served both by canal and 
a light rail from arras. 

the battalion, which had trained and bombed in the town till the 
8th january, relieved the 3rd grenadiers in the reserve trenches of 
the right subsector of this defence, on the 9th january, in heavy 
snow. lancer avenue, which commanded a fine view of our own lines 
and the enemys, and posts k, l, and m just off it all south of the 
river, took half the strength. the remainder garrisoned crump and 
cordite reserve trenches on the north, and supplied an isolated and 
unpleasant post f between the river and the lagoon which could only 
be reached with comfort after dark, when an officer, twenty men, 
a lewisgun, and a couple of signallers watched there in case an 
enterprising enemy should be minded to raid along the towpath. 

next day it thawed and the old horrors of ypres salient were their 
portion. the snow vanished, leaving terrible mud. the day passed 
quietly. nos. 1 and 3 companies had to find a carryingparty for 
front companies in the evening. the story behind the entry tells 
itself. the enemy did not add himself to their burdens. a patrol, 
under 2nd lieutenant h. a. collett, went out the next night january 
11 five hundred yards into no mans landfrom f postsaw and heard 
nothing. f post was always a ghostly sort of place, where bullets 
whistled by without explanation between the furred treetrunks 
along the towpath and the marshy ground behind it was filled with 
shellholes, rusty wire and the black dead of forgotten fights. 
the ruins of rux across the river, suddenly leaping to shape in 
the flare of vry lights, looked down on it like the skeleton of 
a fortress on a stage, and single unexpected shells spattered mud 
across the cold waters. 

on the 13th january they relieved the 2nd grenadiers at the front 
in a fresh assortment of decayed postsscabbard alley, scabbard 
support, welford reserve and the like, whose names even to this day 
make men who served there shiver. as thaw and rain worked on them, 
the trenches all fell in great lumps. 

why troops who had held them all the summer had done nothing to 
revet them and prepare for the winter, i cannot think, one indignant 
sufferer wrote. but that is always the fault of the british army. 
it will not look ahead. he prophesied better than he knew. then 
he went to visit his posts, where the men were already half buried 
in mud. the enemy assisted our repairing parties with trenchmortars 
at intervals, till orders went forth that, though our mortars were 
nowise to stir up trouble, when once it began they would retaliate 
for just five minutes longer than the enemy. by the misfortune of a 
faulty shell, one of our stokes guns burst on the 14th, killing or 
wounding eight men. however, it was noted that the enemy transferred 
his attentions for the next few days to a battalion of east 
lancashires on our right. 

on the 15th all wiring and defencework ceasedemployed solely on 
trying to keep trenches passable. in spite of which the mud gained. 
mens boots were pulled off their feet, and it is on joyous record 
that when captain gordon, the adjutant, tried to get up johnson 
avenue, their only communicationtrench, he stuck up to his waist 
in mud and water and, lest he should be engulfed, had to wriggle 
out of his gumboots, which came up to his thighs, and continue in 
his socks. the gumboots, empty, sank out of sight like a wreck on 
the goodwins. they reconnoitred new tracks for the reliefs, across 
duckboards running in full view of the enemy, who, luckily, had their 
own conditions to fight, and let a couple of our patrols invade no 
mans land unmolested, prowl round two machinegun posts and even 
enter a german front line, being too busy talking and hammering to 
notice us. the sodden sandbags of the revetments bulged outwards 
and met across the trenches. the men worked day and night, and 
blessed every battalions remotest ancestry that had ever used, and 
neglected, that accursed line. 

on the 1zth january they were relieved by the 2nd grenadiers, which 
merely meant their reverting to crump trench, cordite reserve, ceylon 
avenue, etc., where, all being equally impassable, every movement had 
to be effected in the open. 

our artillery chose the 18th to be very active from their positions 
round battalion headquarters near the railway cutting behind, 
whereby there was some enemy retaliation that the mired front line 
could have spared. every one is looking like the worst form of 
trampstanding, walking, sleeping and eating mud. 

on the 19th they got it worse, and when no. 1 company paraded in the 
dawn dark they were in dugouts below the rail embankment to go 
to work, a shell which dropped at the entrance killed one but he 
was the cook, wounded two of their number, and destroyed the whole 
cookingoutfit. captain a. f. l. gordon, m.c., was also slightly 
wounded on that date, but not enough to send him to hospital. he was 
riding into arras with captain woodhouse, the m.o.also a man of 
charmed livesand just behind the railway embankment came in for a 
complete barrage of heavy stuff, intended for battalion headquarters. 
neither he, nor any one else, ever understood why they were not blown 
to pieces. the doctors horse wounded was the only other casualty. 

on the 22nd january the relieved 2nd grenadiers, having handed over 
news of the discovery of a german listeningpost which seemed to 
be used only by night, a scheme was arranged to occupy it while it 
was empty, and astonish the enemy on their return. but the enemy 
never came, though 2nd lieutenant stacpoole and a party of seven, 
with blackened faces and smoked bayonets, lay out for them all 
night. it was the same with a german workingparty, fifty strong, 
located by our patrols on the 22nd, sought on the 23rd, and found 
missing. the enemy were anxious not to give any chances just then, 
for identifications and, though they raided generously in other 
directions, left the guards sector by the scarpe unvisited. they 
delivered mortar bombardments when reliefs were due, and were 
attended to by our artillery at dusk with a desultory but at the 
same time steady shelling, just enough to keep the five principal 
offenders crews in their dugouts. it worked admirably, and the 
enemy mortars, as registered on the maps, were quiet for a whole 
evening. after one such treatment the night of the 25th january 
they drenched the decauville railway, just when the battalion had 
railed back to arras on relief by the 1st grenadiers, with an hours 
intense barrage of gasshells, and a sprinkling of 5.9s and 4.2s. 
battalion headquarters were waiting to follow and all the men had 
been sent down the line because railhead was no healthy place to 
linger at. a company of the 2nd grenadiers, newly relieved, came up 
and also waited for the little train in the still moonlight night, 
and drank hot tea while a spare engine was being coupled up. every 
one thought inevitable prelude to calamity that, after sixteen 
days in the trenches, his troubles were over. then a gasshell 
skimmed over the line which at this point had a cutting on one side 
and an embankment on the other. all hands fled to the embankment 
side and hugged it for precisely one hour while the air screamed to 
the curious whiplashlike noise of the gasshells splintering, and 
filled with the fumes of them. the engine bolted down the line before 
it should be blown up, and when, on the stroke of ten, shelling 
ceased, battalion headquarters, father browne and the doctor, captain 
woodhouse, and the grenadiers company stumbled as best they could 
along the sleepers towards arras. every one missed every one else in 
the confusion, while the irish orderlies raged through the crowd like 
angry nurses, in search of their officers. but at last all hands were 
accounted for, blind, coughing, and, thanks to the noseclips of the 
masks, mostly with sore noses. they got into arras at midnight, and 
a good many of the grenadiers had to be sent down for gas injuries. 

the month closed with the battalion nominally at arras, and actually 
finding more than two thirds of its strength for workingparties in 
the filthy front linea favour which it had not received itself 
while there. its casualty list for january was extraordinarily low, 
being only two men killed and twentysix wounded, one officer, 
captain gordon, wounded and one, 2nd lieutenant d. a. b. moodie in 
hospital. during the month, 2nd lieutenants a. s. stokes and l. h. 
l. carver joined, and 2nd lieutenant a. w. g. jamrack rejoined from 
the reinforcement battalion. 

on the 1st february orders came that the line was to be held by 
all three brigades of the guards division instead of two for it 
must be remembered that each brigade was short one battalion. the 
rearrangement drew more heavily on the workingparties in the forward 
area where a new, foul trenchhyderabad supportwas under way. they 
supplied from two to four hundred men as need was, and lived in arras 
prison in luxurywire beds, and palliasses for every mantill the 
6th february, when they relieved the 2nd coldstream in the front 
line. the supporttrenches here were the best they had found, being 
deep, duckboarded, well revetted and with plenty of dugouts and an 
enviable system of cookhouses delivering hot meals in the actual 
trenches. they sent workingparties to the insatiable engineers and 
the brigade at large for fresh trenches were being sketched out, if 
not built, against the impending german attack. 

the front line from the 10th to the 13th february was remarkably 
quiet but not easy. their patrols found no enemy, nor any sign of 
them in no mans land a little wiring of nights was possible and 
there were no casualties. but the trenchstrength of the battalion 
was weak16 officers and 398 ranks, and every one had to work 
doubletides to keep the ways open. 

they were relieved on st. valentines day, two days after the 4th 
guards brigade, which took with them the 2nd irish guards, had been 
formed under lord ardee, and added to the thirtyfirst division. 

three days in arras prison saw them back again in support just in 
time to get the full benefit of another days thaw. it was a quiet 
tour. one man was killed by a trenchmortar, one badly wounded by a 
riflegrenade, seven by shellsplinters outside a dugout, and five 
men gassed. the enemy confined himself to longrange trenchmortars 
and an increase in aerial activity. he was noticed to object 
very strongly to our aircraft crossing his lines. never was enemy 
more anxious not to draw attention to his moves. and, far behind our 
line at arras and elsewhere, men dug and entrenched and sketched 
works of defence to meet the german rush, while the front trenches 
sat still and looked across deserts, apparently empty of life, till 
a head moved in the open. it was a season without parallel in our 
armies experiencethis mere waiting for a certain blow to be dealt 
at a certain time. no written history records the psychology of 
those spring days. the diary is concerned with the battalions own 
sorrow. here is the story, as written during the month february 
the household battalion was disbanded and eighty men were allotted 
to the battalion. this marks the beginning, and is the first 
official recognition of the fact that the irish guards cannot keep 
up the supply of irish troops. a most regrettable epoch in the 
history of the regiment. on the heels of this comes, comically 
enough, almost the sole personal expression of feeling in the entire 
diary. they went, on the last day of february, into rest at gordon 
camp, christened after the 9th gordons who made it. it is without 
exception the most comfortable and bestlaidout camp i have ever 
been in. everything that one could possibly wish for is hereeven an 
officers bathroom with porcelain bath and hot and cold water laid 
on. it was an alltooshort interval in cold and dirty work for 
on the 2nd march the scarpe trenches reclaimed themfampoux, colt 
reserve, pepper and puddingin snow, sleet, and unbroken monotony of 
workingparties. 

on the 6th march the diary notes that the 2nd grenadiers, whom they 
relieved the next day, carried out a raid, successful in itself, and 
doubly so as drawing no retaliation on their own line. it resulted in 
two identifiable prisoners and a machinegun. but battalions do not 
approve of their neighbours raiding when the enemy is nervous. 


the march push 

their next frontline turn6th to 10th marchwas utterly 
uneventful, and on the 12th they, being then in stirling camp, were 
ordered to stand to for the expected german offensive. it proved 
to be no more than a light shelling. so the still fine days, in line 
or in support, ran out till the dawn of the 21st march when the 
great shells suddenly descended on arras, and rumours, worse than 
any shelling, followed their tracks. says the diary the german 
offensive has begun. 

the evacuation of the town, during the next two days, was a 
nightmare of flying masonry, clouds of dust, the roar of falling 
brickwork, contradictory orders, and mobs of drifting civilians, 
their belongings pushed before or hauled after them and no power to 
order them where to go. arras, always in the front line, had been 
safe so long, it was inconceivable that there should be real danger 
now. might they not camp out and return tomorrow? but the enemy 
were reported almost in sight, and ready to open on the town with 
their fieldguns. they had broken through, men said, under cover of 
the heavy morning fogbroken through everywhere along the line of 
all our old gains from lens to st. quentin, and their whole strength 
was behind the blow. no one could understand it, though all men 
argued and while the refugees fled forth, expostulating, blaming, 
but seldom weeping, that sunny day, eight hundred shells fell 
purposefully on the dishevelled town. by evening word came that our 
somme line had not only broken but gone outinfantry, artillery and 
uncounted storesbetween chrisy and demicourt in the north. south 
of that, the old cambrai salient, which had not been hardly tried, 
was standing but would have to withdraw or be cut off, because, from 
gouzeaucourt to la fre, ten miles and more south of st. quentin, the 
german tide had swept in from one to three miles deep, and was racing 
forward. it is not difficult to imagine what manner of reports 
the mere truth gave birth to, while the battalion waited on in the 
communal college where it was billeted, and was not encouraged to 
wander about the rocking, sliding streets. 

by the evening of the 22nd march men began to understand it was no 
mere breakthrough but a collapse such as had never befallen british 
arms in the history of her people. officers were sent out in the 
morning to reconnoitre the supportline of a third system of defence 
between wancourt and hninsurcojeul. but hninsurcojeul was 
already under the hand of the enemy, who had gained three more miles 
in a few hours and, left and right, were widening the breach. 

the morning of the 22nd march had been foggy again till noon and, 
under that cover, the germans had again broken in on our surprised 
or withdrawing divisions. report said that whole battalions and 
even brigades had been cut off by the flood their wireless working 
faithfully so long as it stood, and the sound of their smallarm fire 
continuing for a while after their last words had ceased. late that 
evening orders came for the battalion to move at midnight from arras 
to boisleuxst. marc, some six miles due south of the town on a line 
more or less prepared against eventualities, and, with their brigade, 
to give what help they could to the divisions who might be falling 
back on that front. this was all that could be made out of the mass 
of contradictory orders that afflicted them, and the growing crop of 
rumours and alarms that upset men almost more than any countermanded 
orders. 

the battalion set to work on the 23rd march to dig a supportline 
in rear of what was called the army line which ran in front of 
boisleuxst. marc while the evacuation of arras was being completed 
and all details and drummers marched to the reinforcement battalion 
at agnezlesduisans, on the scarpe well to the west of arras. in 
those days we was throubled the way a man is disthressed in dhreams. 
all manner of things happening, yell understand, and him the only 
one able to do nothing. but i wisht id been a musicaner. 

the diary for the 24th march merely says, remained in same 
positions, and refers to repeated rumours. they sent their 
firstline transport back out of harms way, and went on digging. yet 
the 24th was a day no rumour could have painted much blacker than 
it was. from directly in front of the guards division at boisleux, 
the line of the german gains in the past fortyeight hours dropped 
straight south to the somme at clry, and thence skirted its western 
bank to ham, where it broke across to the wide marshes of the oise 
below la fre. two thirds of the hardbought ground of the somme 
campaign, the scores of villages whose names smelt of blood, were 
lost, and the harvesting of the remainder was a matter barely of 
hours. 

next day saw bhagnies, grvillers, irles of the wired bastions, 
miraumont, pys, courcelette, contalmaison, thiepval and its myriad 
dead, and pozires of the australiansthe very hearts of the 
deadliest of the first fightingsoverrun and the question rose 
in mens minds whether the drive would end, as was intended, in 
the splitting apart of the french and british armies. for what was 
happening north of the somme was play to the situation south of it. 
there the enemys swarms of aeroplanes harried the amiens hospitals, 
driving the civilians into the broadside of the country behind, where 
the moonlight nights betrayed them to fresh hosts in the air. 

by the 26th march the tongue of the advancing tide had licked past 
noyon and roye and, next day, had encircled montdidier. meantime, 
our old somme base on the ancre, whence the great fights were fed 
and supplied from the hundred camps and dumps round maulte, and 
the railwaysidings between albert and amiens, had passed into the 
enemys hands. to all human appearance, the whole of our bitter 
years effort was abolished, as though it had never been. the enemy 
had prepared, brought together, and struck at the time that best 
suited himself, with seventythree divisions against thirtyseven 
british divisions, and the outcome was appalling defeat of our arms. 

it would thus seem that no amount of inspiring statesmanship at home, 
or anxious readjustment of divisions at the front, will make troops 
where troops are not. therefore the battalions and batteries in the 
full blast of the onset perished or were taken prisoners and of the 
stores captured or destroyed, lest they should benefit the enemy, 
we may look to receive no account. not the least depressing of the 
sights that adorned the landscapes were the dumps lit by our own 
hands, flaring to heaven when, as turned out afterwards, there was 
really no need. divisions were being raced up to reinforce the fluid 
front as fast as might be, but no one knew for certain when or where 
they would arrive, and camp commandants acted on their own judgments. 
the battalions in the line swayed to conflicting storms of orders. 


standingto 

on the 25th, being still at boisleuxst. marc, the 1st irish 
guards were detailed to relieve several different units, but 
more specially the 1st coldstream just east of hamelincourt then 
practically in possession of the enemy. one found out where the 
enemy were by seeing them come over the brows of unexpected slopes 
in small groups that thinned out and settled down to machinegunning 
under cover of equally unexpected fieldguns. they spent the whole 
day being hit and held in this fashion, and, close on midnight, got 
definite instructions not to wait for any relief but to go off to the 
sugarfactory near boyelles, which they did, and bestowed themselves 
in huts in the neighbourhood, and there were hotly shelled during 
the night. the german attack was well home on that sector now, and 
the german infantry might be looked for at any moment. they removed 
from those unhealthy huts to an old trench next morning, where their 
first set of orders was to relieve the 1st scots guards. order, 
provisional, definite and cancelled all in two hours and a half 
later came ordersequally definite, equally washed out laterto 
relieve the 2nd coldstream in another sector, and finally just before 
midnight they relieved the 1st scots guards after all. that battalion 
had been in the army line between st. lger and hnin, but the 
enemys advance had forced it back in the direction of boisleuxst. 
marc near the arrasalbert railwayline. the battalion found it a 
little before dawn, and lay out with all four companies in the front 
line, as did the other battalions. by this time, though it would be 
not easy to trace their various arrivals in the confusion, the guards 
brigades had got into line between boisleuxst. marc and ayette, 
on a front of roughly three and a half miles, while battalions of 
exhausted and withdrawing divisions, hard pressed by the enemy, 
passed through them each with its burden of bad news. it was not an 
inspiriting sight, nor was the actual position of the guards brigades 
one to be envied. high ground commanded them throughout, and a number 
of huts and halfruined buildings gave good cover to the gathering 
machineguns. the german advance on that quarter resembled, as one 
imaginative soul put it, an encompassment of werewolves. they 
slouched forward, while men rubbed tired eyes, in twos and threes, 
at no point offering any definite target either for smallarm or 
artillery, and yet, in some wizard fashion, always thickening and 
spreading, while our guns from the rear raged and tore uselessly at 
their almost invisible lines. incidentally, too, our own gunfire in 
some sectors, and notably behind the fourth guards brigade, did our 
men no service. but the most elaborate of preparations have an end, 
and must culminate in the charge home. 

an intense barrage on the morning of the 2zth march heralded the 
crisis, but luckily went wide of all the battalion except no. 2 
company on the left. the attack followed, and down the trenched 
line from ayette and boisleuxst. marc, the brigade answered with 
unbroken musketry and lewisguns. it was an almost satisfactory 
slaughter, dealt out by tired, but resolute, men with their backs 
to the wall. except for occasional rushes of the enemy, cut down 
ere they reached the wire, there was nothing spectacular in that 
days work. the battalion shot and kept on shooting as it had been 
trained to do in the instructioncamps and on the comfortable ranges 
that seemed now so inconceivably far away. the enemy, having direct 
observation over the whole of our line, shot well and close. we 
suffered, but they suffered more. they ranged along the front from 
north to south as waves range down the face of a breakwater, but 
found nothing to carry away or even dislodge. night closed in with a 
last rush at the wire on the battalions front that left a wreckage 
of german dead and wounded, and two machineguns horribly hung up 
in the strands. our losses in officers were 2nd lieutenant stokes 
severely wounded in the morning, and in the afternoon, lieutenant 
nash killed, and captain derek fitzgerald wounded and sent down. 
lieut.colonel r. v. pollok and lieutenants bencejones and bagenal 
were also slightly wounded but remained at duty. when an officer 
dropped and could not get up again without help he was assumed to be 
unfit for workbut not before. 

yell understand, twas no question, those days, what ye could or 
could not do. ye did it. 

and so ended the 2zth of march with the german front from lens to 
albert held up, and destined, though men then scarce dared believe, 
not to advance to another effective surge. the french and british 
armies were perilously near forced asunder now and, the needs of the 
case compelling what might have been done long ago, general foch in 
the little city of doullens was, on the 26th march, given supreme 
command of all the hardpressed hosts. the news went out at once 
into the front line where men received it as part and parcel of 
the immense situation. nothing could have astonished them then, or, 
unless it directly concerned food or rest, have made them think. 

the battalion was placed where it was to endure, and was thankful 
that the 28th was a fairly quiet day but for heavy shelling on 
their right, and trenchmortars and shells on themselves. no. 2 
company, who had been unlucky with the big barrage the day before, 
suffered once again. 

next day 29th march, which was another quiet occasion, lieutenant 
zigomala was wounded and forty of the most tired men were relieved 
by an equal number from the reinforcement battalion, which relief 
became systematized, as it eased the strain a little to clear out 
visibly finished men day by day. all were worn down but remained 
cheerful. those who have full right to speak affirm that, in 
absolutely impossible situations, the irish could be trusted to play 
up beyond even a cockney battalion. the matter will always be in 
dispute, but none know better than the men who saw the push through 
how superbly the mudcaked, wiredrawn platoons bore themselves. 

on the 30th march the attack rolled up again from the south where it 
had met no particular encouragement, and barraged the battalions 
sector with heavies for a couple of hours causing fortytwo 
casualties among the men and wounding lieutenants stacpoole and 
bagenal. it then fell upon the 2nd grenadiers and 1st coldstream 
immediately to the battalions left and right, and was driven off 
with loss. there were other attacks, but with less venom in them, 
before the hun could be induced to withdraw. half the battalion spent 
the night digging a line of posts in support which they occupied by 
dawn. 

on the last of march nothing of importance occurred. everything, 
indeed, had occurred already. the old somme salient which, english 
fashion, had become an institution, was completely reversed on the 
ominous newspaper maps. the germans stood atiptoe looking into 
amiens, and practically the entire spare strength of the british 
armies in france had been used and used up to bring them to that 
stand. the french were equally worn down. the american armies were 
not yet in place, and what reinforcing divisions were ready in 
england somewhat lacked training. 

the battalion, a straw among these waves, had in the month lost, 
besides officers, twentythree other ranks killed and one hundred and 
seven wounded and one missing. it is even reported that there had 
been many days on which, owing to press of work, they had not shaved. 
that, yell understand, is being dirty, an a crime. believe me, 
now, there was times when we was all criminals, even mr.  an 
it disthressed him more than bloody war. 

the fierceness of the enemys attack on the 28th marchranging from 
puisieux to northeast of arrashad been, to an extent, his own 
undoing. for he had thrown his men in shoulder to shoulder in six 
lines at some spots, and our guns had caught them massed, forming up. 
but the check, severe as it was, did not choke off a final effort 
against the strained british and french cordon, on the 4th and 5th 
of april. the main weight of it, on the first day, fell south of 
the somme, and on the second, north, from dernancourt below maulte 
to bucquoy which is on the same level as gomiecourt. except that 
the eastern side of bucquoy was carried for a time, the northern 
attack was completely held, and so at last, after a heartshattering 
fortnight, the somme front came to rest. the battalion, with its 
headquarters under much too direct enemy observation near boiryst. 
martin, reverted to its ancient routine of trenchwork and reliefs 
under shellfire. 

the days included regular bursts of shelling, a large proportion of 
which was blue or yellowcross gas, and when the battalion lay in 
reserve they were kept awake by our energetic batteries on three 
sides of them. 

their st. martin camp was a scientifically constructed deathtrap. 
most of it was under enemy observation and without groundshelter. 
what shots ranged over our forward batteries or short of our rear 
ones, found their camp. when our 15inch guns retaliated, from a 
hundred and fifty yards behind them, the blast extinguished all 
candles. the diary observes the noise and the hostile retaliation 
made proper rest difficult. that was on the 4th april, when the 
attack south of the somme was in full swing. 

on the 5th april their huts in brigadereserve were shelled for half 
an hour, with six casualties, and when they went into the line on 
a new sector, held by scattered posts, nearly every one of their 
guides lost his miserable way in the dark. headquarters here were 
pitched in an old german trench and thenfor they were not even 
rainproofshifted to the edge of boiryst. martin village. a cellar 
had to be dug out and supported, and the rain descended on the 
mudpie that it was, and when headquarters, and all their papers, 
had established themselves, the enemy gasbombarded the village 
with perfect accuracy. the commanding officer, lieut.colonel r. v. 
pollok, the assistant adjutant, lieutenant j. n. ward, and the m. o., 
captain woodhouse, had to be sent down suffering from yellowcross 
gas aftereffects. 

consider for a moment the woes of a battalion headquarters in the 
field. late in january, captain gordon, the pukka adjutant, riding 
to arras for a bath, canters into a barrage of heavies and is 
wounded in the handa vital spot for adjutants. this leaves only the 
c.o. and the assistant adjutant, lieutenant j. n. ward, to carry on, 
and whatever the state of the front, the authorities demand their 
regular supply of papers and forms. no sooner has the assistant 
adjutant got abreast of things, than all battalion headquarters are 
knocked out in an hour. luckily, they were only away for three or 
four days. the enemy added a small and easily beaten off raid to the 
confusion he had made in orderlyroom major baggallay took over the 
command, and captain budd, adequate and untroubled as ever, who had 
held the ghostly f post on the scarpe, acted as adjutant. officers 
were beginning to wear out now. three of the most tired were sent 
down and replaced by substitutes from the reinforcement battalion. 

the following officers joined for duty on the 10th april lieutenant 
m. buller, lieutenant acting captain w. joyce, lieutenant hon. b. 
a. a. ogilvy, and 2nd lieutenants t. b. maughan, p. r. j. barry, h. 
j. lofting, g. c. maclachlan and j. c. haydon. 

it was on the morning of the 9th april that the enemy opened his 
second great thrust on the lys, and the three weeks fighting that 
all but wiped out the ypres salient won him messines, kemmel, 
armentires, neuve eglise, bailleul, merville, and carried him 
towards the channel ports, within five miles of hazebrouck. that 
the stroke was expected made it none the less severe. spring on 
that front had chosen to be unseasonably dry. the lowlands in the 
lys valley, normally their own best defences, gave passage to men 
and guns when they should have been still impassable. whatever else 
may have betrayed them, the germans had no cause to complain of the 
weather throughout the war, or indeed of the foresight of their 
adversaries. they had to deal chiefly with divisions that had been 
fought out in the somme push, reinforced with fillings from england 
and sent northward in a hurry. sir douglas haigs despatches give the 
relative disparity thus 

  in the lys battle, prior to the 30th april, the enemy engaged 
  against the british forces a total of 42 divisions, of which 33 
  were fresh and 9 had fought previously on the somme. against these 
  42 german divisions, 25 british divisions were employed, of which 8 
  were fresh and 1z had taken a prominent part in the somme battle. 

these were worn out, and as the days of fighting continued many of 
them were so dead to the world that they laid them down and slept 
where they dropped by battalions. when orders came, it was a matter 
almost of routine that each senior, handing them on, should assault 
his junior into some sort of comprehension. officers dared not trust 
themselves even to lean against walls for fear they should slide 
down dead asleep and as a private of the line put it in confession, 
i dont know what the men would have done but for standing sentry. 
they got their sleep then. there is a story of a tattered brigade, 
eight days, or it might have been ten, without closing an eyelid, 
which was flung back into the fight after assurance of relief, 
and, what was much worse, a few hours rest. they returned, like 
sleepwalkers, and laid them down in some shallow henscratchings 
that passed for trenchwork, where without emotion they resigned 
themselves to being blown out or up in detail. while they watched 
drowsily the descent and thickening of a fresh german shellstorm, 
preluding fresh infantry attacks, it occurred to them vaguely that 
there were high and increasing noises overheadnot at all like the 
deep whoop of heavies. then all the darkness behind the enemy lit 
with a low outlining groundflarethe deathdance of innumerable 
.z5s. foch had sent up very many guns behind them, almost wheel to 
wheel, and when the french gunners at last shut off, the packed enemy 
trenches that were waiting to continue their march to the channel, as 
soon as their own fire should have wiped up the few british bayonets 
before them, lay as still as the graves that they were. then what 
remained of the brigade that had seen this miracle was relieved by 
another brigade, and stretched itself out to sleep behind it. experts 
in miseries say that, for sheer strain, the lys overwent anything 
imagined in the war, and in this, many who have suffered much, are 
agreed. 

the 4th guards brigade, which had been in billets near 
villersbrulin, after its heavy work on the arras side, was 
despatched on the 10th april to the flat country round vierhoek, and 
thereas will be toldspent itself in the desperate fighting round 
la couronne and vieuxberquin that gave time to bar the enemies way 
to hazebrouck andwiped out the 2nd battalion. 

the 1st battalion, sufficiently occupied with its own front near 
boiry, where the supportlines were targets by day and night, 
and the frontposts holes in the ground that seemed to shift at 
every relief, were told on the 12th april that a german attack was 
imminent, which report was repeated at intervals throughout the day. 
but their patrols found nothing moving in front of them, and their 
regular allowance of hostile mortarbombs was not increased. the 
rumours from the lys side were far more disturbing. 

on the 13th april they were relieved by the 24th lancashire 
fusiliers, marched to blairville where they embussed for saulty at 
the head of the little river that runs in stone channels through 
quiet doullens, and there, very cold, wet, and muddy, found the 
best billets taken by corps and labour troops whom they knew not. the 
sentiments of men who have been digging and fighting without a break 
for ten weeks when confronted with warmly billeted staffs and fat 
backarea workingparties need not be recorded. 

at saulty they rested from the 15th to the 23rd april under perpetual 
short notice one hour from 8 a. m. till noon and three hours for the 
rest of the day and night. thus means of training were limited, and 
the weather varied from wet to snowshowers. 

on the 24th of april the enemy captured villersbretonneux, staring 
directly into amiens, which ground, had they been allowed to hold 
uninterruptedly even for a day, might have been made too strong to 
reduce with the forces at our disposal then, and thus would have 
become the very edge of the wedge for splitting the french and 
english armies asunder. but that night, and literally at almost 
an hours notice, a counterattack by a brigade of the eighteenth 
division, and the 13th and 15th brigades of the fourth and fifth 
australian divisions, swept villersbretonneux clear, and established 
ourselves beyond possibility of eviction. thus, the one last chance 
that might have swung the whole war passed out of the enemys hands. 

on that same day the 1st irish guards returned in lorries along the 
cramped and twisting roads by bienvillers to monchy, to relieve a 
battalion of the royal scots in the front line at ayette, three 
miles south down the line from boiry. ayette village had been 
recaptured on the 3rd april by the thirtysecond division, and had 
removed a thorn in the side of troops in that sector. once again, 
their guides almost unanimously lost their way, and the multivious 
relief took half the night to accomplish. 

it appeared as though the enemy had skinned his line here to feed his 
other enterprises in the north for his outposts did nothing and, 
beyond shelling monchy village from time to time, his guns were also 
idle. 

so on the 29th april they arranged a battalion raid on a german 
post supposed to be held by night only to occupy it if possible. 
but the enemy were in occupation and very ready. the little party 
returned with their officer, 2nd lieutenant g. c. maclachlan, and a 
sergeant wounded. a few weeks later the battalion worked out a most 
satisfactory little tenminute returnraid without a single casualty, 
and so cleared their account. 

april had been an inexpensive month for both men and officers. the 
commanding officer, the assistant adjutant, and the medical officer 
had, as we know, been slightly gassed at headquarters, and 2nd 
lieutenants c. l. browne and maclachlan wounded only. three men had 
been killed and fortyone wounded. but no less than twentysix were 
sent down sickproof that the strain had told. 

the enemy showed a certain amount of imagination unusual on that 
front. one of our forward posts, expecting the return of a patrol 
on the dawn on the 3rd may, saw a party of five approaching and 
challenged. irish guards was the reply, followed by a few bombs 
which did some damage. this peculiarly irritating trick had not 
been worked on the battalion for some time, and they felt itas 
their amused friends to left and right in the line took care that 
they should. otherwise, the enemy devoted themselves to more and 
heavier gunnery, which, in a fiveday tour, caused twenty casualties 
wounded and one killed. brigade reserve camps were outside 
monchyaubois, whence tired men were sent to the details camp at 
pommier regularly bombed by aeroplane, and from pommier were drawn 
occasional workingparties. one of these included the battalion 
drummers and pipers, who enjoyed what might be called a day out in 
some old trenches. 

on the 5th may, lieutenant keenan arrived from the 2nd battalion to 
take over the adjutancy in place of captain gordon, who had been 
transferred to the 2nd battalion as second in command, after almost 
three years continuous service with the 1st battalion. 

on the zth may they went up from monchy, by the everhateful, 
evershelled cojeul valley, to the ayette subsector, relieving the 
2nd coldstream. next day the devildirected luck of the front line, 
after a peaceful, fine night, caused the only trenchmortar sent over 
by the enemy that did not clean miss all our posts, to fall directly 
in no. 3 post, right front company no. 4, instantly killing captain 
budd, m.c., commanding the company, and with him 2nd lieutenant e. 
c. g. lord and seven men. captain budds energy and coolness, proved 
on many occasions, were a particular loss to his comrades. he was a 
large silent man, on whom every one could and did lean heavily at all 
times. he knew no fear and was of the selfcontained, intensely alive 
type, always in danger, but never by his friends connected with any 
thought of death. second lieutenant lord rosy lord was a keen and 
promising young officer. those were the only casualties of the tour. 
they were buried in the little military cemetery near ayette. 

our guns had been working steadily from behind, but till this 
trenchmortar outburst, most of the enemy replies had been directed 
on ayette itself or our supportlines. 

the shelling throughout the month grew more and more earnest and our 
replies, roaring overhead, worried the deadtired soldiery. the work 
was all at nightwiring and improving posts, and unlimited digging 
of communicationways between them for whether a trenchline held 
till christmas, went up bodily next minute, or was battered down 
every hour, in the making there was but one standard of work that 
beseemed the battalion and though divisional commanders might, and 
as on the dreary scarpe posts did, draw gratified commanding officers 
aside and tell them that for quantity and quality their trenchcraft 
excelled that of other battalions, the battalion itself was never 
quite contented with what it had accomplished. 

their next turnmay 16 to 21was fine and hot for a couple of 
mornings and regular barrages were put down on the supportline when 
they were standingto. four men were killed and thirteen, of whom two 
died later, were wounded. 

they were heavily shelled in brigadereserve camp on the night of 
the 24th. four officerscaptain bencejones, lieutenants riley and 
buller, and 2nd lieutenant barrywounded, one other rank killed, and 
five wounded. 

when they went up to relieve the 2nd coldstream on the 25th may, 
they were caught in platoonorder at the corner of adinfer wood, a 
place of no good name to marching troops, and lieutenant williams was 
slightly wounded. threequarters of an hours intense barrage was put 
down, on front and support lines, as soon as they were fairly in, 
causing several casualties. 

the dawn of the 28th may began with another sharp barrage on the 
front line and the dinnerhour was a continuous barrage of 5.9s and 
4.2s directed at battalion headquarters. they were missed, but a 
direct hit was made on an aidpost of the 2nd grenadiers less than a 
hundred yards off on our left. as a distraction, orders came in from 
brigade headquarters the same morning that the battalion would carry 
out a raid on one of the enemys posts in front of the right company. 
they were given their choice, it would seem, of twoone without 
artilleryhelp and by day the other with an artillerybacking and 
by night. the second in command, major r. baggallay, elected for 
works of darknessor as near as might be in spite of a disgustingly 
bright moon. lieutenant c. s. obrien was detailed to command, with 
sergeant regan, a forceful man, as sergeant. only twentynine hands 
were required, and therefore sixty volunteered, moved to this, not 
by particular thirst for glory, of which the trenches soon cure 
men, as by human desire to escape monotony punctuated with shells. 
extra rumrations, too, attach to extra duties. as a raid it was a 
small affair, but as a work of art, historically worth recording 
in some detail. f battery r.h.a. and 400 battery r.f.a. supplied 
the lifting barrages which duly cut the post off from succour, 
while standingbarrages of 18pounders, a barrage of 4.5s hows. 
and groups, firing concentrations at left and right enemy trenches, 
completed the boxed trap. in the few minutes the affair lasted, it 
is not extravagant to estimate that more stuff was expended than the 
whole of our front in 1914 was allowed to send over in two days. 

the post had been reconnoitred earlier in the evening and was known 
not to be wired. all the raiders, with blackened faces and bayonets 
and stripped uniforms that betrayed nothing, were in position on the 
formingup tape five minutes before zero. the moon forced them to 
crawl undignifiedly out in twos and threes, but they lined up with 
the precision of a football line, at oneyard intervals and, a minute 
before zero, wriggled to within seventy yards of their quarry. at 
zero the barrage came down bursting beautifully, just beyond the 
enemy post, and about two seconds ere it lifted the raiders charged 
in. no one had time to leave or even to make a show of resistance, 
and they were back with their five prisoners, all alive and quite 
identifiable, in ten minutes. the waiting stretcherparties were not 
needed andbest of allretaliation was slight and entirely on 
ayette. one is not told what ayette thought of it. the motive of 
the raid was to secure identity alive or dead. but when all was 
over without hurt, one single shell at morning standto may 28 
killed 2nd lieutenant l. h. l. carver in a frontline trench. 

they held the raided post under close observation that day and the 
next may 29, and discovered that it had been reoccupied by a 
machinegun party. as they particularly did not wish it to put out 
wire or become offensive, they dosed it with constant bursts of their 
own machinegun and were rewarded by hearing groans and cries, and 
our listeningpatrol in no mans land saw a man being carried away. 

on the 31st may the enemy set to, in earnest, to shell all 
reservelines and backarea for six hours as well as the firstline 
transport in adinfer wood after dark, when wounded horses are not 
easy to handle. their relief by the 2nd grenadiers was badly delayed 
by heavy shelling all the way from the front line to monchy, but 
instead of any number of casualties, which might reasonably have been 
expected, the battalion got through unscathed. 

the months list was heavy enough as it stood. five officers had been 
wounded and three killed in action seventeen other ranks killed, 
and fortyeight wounded, and all this in the regular wearandtear 
frontline routine with nothing more to see than a stray german cap 
here and there. twentytwo men were sent down sick, and the diary 
begins to hint at the prevalence of the spanish fever, which was in 
a few months to sweep france and all the world. 

june was a month of peace. it opened in reservetrenches at the 
southwest end of monchyaubois, and when they next went up into 
line, a new route had been surveyed round the dreaded corner of 
adinfer wood which saved some shelling of reliefs. 

on the 4th june the c.o., lieutenantcolonel pollok, left the 
battalion to take over command of sixth corps army school, and major 
r. r. c. baggallay assumed command. likewise three stray germans were 
captured opposite one of our posts. 

on the 5th major gordon arrived from the 2nd battalion for duty as 
second in command. 

they were relieved by the 1st kings regiment on the 6th junea 
somewhat hectic performance, as the frontline trackways were 
intricate, needing guides at almost every turn of them, and, for 
the runup, one guide per platoon. after which, about one in the 
morning, it was discovered that the kings had come in without their 
lewisguns. some divisions were in the habit of leaving and taking 
over the lewisguns in situ but the guards division always went 
in and out of the line with their very own weapons. one cannot 
delay a clear june dawn and, as the relieved battalion had to get 
off in tightly packed and horribly conspicuous lorries, and as the 
last platoon could not reach those lorries till 3 a. m., it was 
touchandgo whether daylight would not reveal them like a sunday 
school treat to the german guns. but luck held. the last lorry was 
safe in bavincourt wood five miles behind monchy before day had 
stripped the landscape, and the 1st kings were left to meditate on 
the wealth and variety of the irish tongue, as delivered on empty 
stomachs in whispers down packed trenches. 

the battalion billeted at bavincourt when the 2nd h.l.i. had got out 
of their quarters, and since, like the other camps, bavincourt was 
regularly bombed, made earth walls round their nissen huts, and slits 
near them to be used against planes or too extravagant shellfire. 
here they stayed till the end of the month, cleaning, refitting, and 
training in open warfare principally and, this time, they were not 
to be disappointed at lewis gunnery, bombing, and general physical 
smarteningup. when the brigade sports took place at saulty they won 
every event but three, and when the corps commander, the following 
week, inspected the different ways in the divisional methods of 
carrying the eight lewisguns of each company all on one limber, the 
method employed by the battalion was considered the best, and all 
units were ordered to copy. they had rigged a sort of false top on 
a rearlimber which accommodated all eight guns together. 

a divisional horseshow was held on the 22nd, but there the battalion 
did not get a single prize. they hammered on at their trainings and 
brigade fielddaysall with an eye to the coming open warfare, while 
the spanish fever, which was influenza of the postwar type, grew 
steadily worse among men and officers alike. when h.r.h. the duke 
of connaught visited divisional headquarters at bavincourt chteau 
on the 30th june, and the battalion had to find not only the guard 
of honour but 160 men to line the avenue to the chteau, there were 
seventy officers and men down with the pest, out of less than 900. 
thirtyone men had been sent down sick, two had been killed in action 
presumably by overhead bombing, for the diary does not mention any 
trench casualties, and twentythree wounded. 

the following officers joined during the month of june lieutenant c. 
a. j. vernon, and 2nd lieutenants e. b. spafford, a. e. hutchinson, 
h. r. baldwin, g. f. mathieson, j. a. m. faraday, e. m. harvey, m.c., 
and a. e. oconnor, all on the 2nd june captain a. w. l. paget on 
the 4th, and 2nd lieutenant a. h. ofarrell on the 10th june. second 
lieutenant c. s. obrien, who was in command of the model raid 
already mentioned, was awarded the military cross on the 9th of june. 

after a sporting interlude on the 3rd july, when they met the 1st 
munster fusiliers at athletics and won everything except the hundred 
yards, they relieved the 15th h.l.i. in the intermediate line near 
hendecourt. as a matter of fact, they were a sick people just then. 
all battalion headquarters except the commanding officer, and all the 
officers of no. 2 company, besides officers of other companies, were 
down with spanish fever on going into the line. a third of the men 
were also sick at one time, and apparently the enemy too, for they 
hardly troubled to shell by day and let the nightreliefs go without 
attention. the only drawbacks were furious summer thunderstorms 
which, from time to time, flooded the trenches and woke up more 
fever. the front line held here by the guards was badly knocked about 
and battered, and instructions ran that, in event of serious attack, 
it would not be contested. 

there is no clear evidence of the state of the battalions collective 
mind at this time, but from home letters it might be gathered that 
the strain of the bush and its bewilderment had given place to the 
idea that great things were preparing. battalions are very often 
told tales to this effect, but they suit themselves as to the amount 
that they swallow. no power on earth, for instance, could have 
persuaded the veterans of the somme, after cambrai, that there was 
anything doing but as the summer of 1918 grew warmer in the wooded 
and orchard country behind the amiensalbert line, and our lines 
there held and were strengthened, and those who had been home or 
on the seas reported what they had heard and seen, hope, of a kind 
not raised before, grew in the talks of the men and the officers. 
understand, i do not say there was anny of the old chat regardin 
that the war would finish next chuseday, the way we talked in 16. 
but, whatever they said acrost the water, we did not hould twould 
endure those two more extra years all them civilians was dishin out 
to us. what did we think? that 19 would see the finish? twud be 
hard to tell what we thought. leave it this waywe was no more than 
waitin on mercies to happen antwas mericles that transpired 

they relieved their own brigade battalions with the punctilio proper 
to their common ritual, and for the benefit of over a hundred 
recruits. it was their ancient comrades under all sorts of terrors, 
the 2nd coldstream, whose guides from boiryst. martin one night lost 
their way in the maze of tracks and turns to the front line. but, as 
meekly set forth in the diary, when it came the battalions turn to 
be relieved by the 2nd grenadiers, all tracks had been carefully 
picketed by this battalion to assist grenadier companies coming in 
and ours going out. the occasions when the guides of the 1st irish 
guards lost their way must be looked for in the reports of others. 

little shelling and no casualties were the order of the fine days 
till, on the 29th july, taking over from the 2nd coldstream, they 
found six platoons of the 3rd battalion, 320th regiment, u.s.a., 
which had come into line the night before and were attached for 
instruction. these were young, keen, desperately anxious to learn, 
and not at all disposed to keep their heads down. 

next day the enemy opened on them, and were rather offensive in 
their shelling. the front platoon of the americans, attached to 
the battalions front company, caught it worst, but no casualties 
were reported. then things quieted down, and a patrol of special 
battalion scouts, a new organization of old, trusty no mans 
landers, under lieutenant vernon as intelligence officer, went out 
on reconnaissance, across the cojeul valley, and wandered generally 
among ancient trenchlines in bright moonlight. they found a german 
party working on fresh earth, but no signs of enemy patrols on the 
move in the valley. this was as well. no one wished to see that dead 
ground occupied, except by our own people at the proper time. 

julys bill of casualties was the lowest of all. no officer and 
but one man had been killed, and two wounded. this last was when 
the enemy shelled boiry to celebrate the arrival of the american 
platoons. seventeen men were sent down sick. fifty other ranks were 
transferred to the 1st from the 2nd battalion, now acting as a feeder 
to its elder brother. 

on the 1st of august the battalion was still in the peaceful front 
line watching the six american platoons being relieved by other 
six platoons from the 2nd battalion of the 320th regiment. it was 
observed, not without some envythey did not know enough to save 
emselves throuble, an they would not ha done it if they had. they 
was too full of this same dam new ould war. even at this immense 
distance of time, one can almost hear the veterans commenting on the 
zeal and excitement that filled the stale lines where, to those 
young eyes from across the water, everything was as shiningnew as 
death. 

on the 3rd august the battalion made a reconnaissance of a 
post with the idea of raiding it, which was a complete though 
bloodless failure. some of our back guns chose the exact moment 
when the raiders were setting out on the sure information of a 
scoutingparty, who had just come in to wipe up the unconscious 
little garrison and their machinegun, and woke the night with heavy 
shell dropped in our own wire and in front of our objective. 
naturally nothing could be done, and the affair was called off 
till the next evening 4th august, when a crawlingparty, under 
lieutenant vernon, of a corporal and six men went out along the same 
route that the scouts had taken the night before. they were expected 
and welcomed with enthusiasm. a sentry gave the alarm, a little party 
ran out to cut them off, the machinegun a heavy one, which had not 
betrayed itself before, promptly opened fire, but wide of our prone 
men, and a german, as promptly, hove bombs in the wrong direction. 
all this, says the report, happened as soon as some one inside the 
post gave short, decisive orders. then vry lights flared without 
stint, and, being some way from home, with much unlocated wire 
between, the raiders got away swiftly and safely. the tracks of the 
scouts through the long grass the night before had put the enemy 
on the alert. but if our guns had only held their tongues on that 
occasion, our coup might have been brought off. instead of which, the 
enemy woke up and shelled a front company for a quarter of an hour 
with 60pounders before he could be induced to go to bed. 


the beginnings of the end 

but all this was as light, casual, and unrelated as the throwing 
of the ball from hand to hand that fills time before an innings 
and, by the latter part of july, men began half unconsciously to 
speculate when our innings would begin. in the north, the enemy, 
crowded into the lys salient, which they had been at such pains to 
hack out over the bodies of the 2nd battalion, were enjoying some 
of the pleasures our men had tasted round ypres for so many years. 
our gathering guns, crossploughing them where they lay, took fresh 
toll of each new german division arriving to make good the wastage. 
in the south, outside amiens, the australians, an impenitent and 
unimpressionable breed, had, on the 4th of july, with the help of 
four companies of the thirtythird american division, and sixty 
tanks, gone araiding round the neighbourhood of hamel and vaire 
wood, with results that surprised everybody except themselves. they 
did not greatly respect the enemy, and handled him rudely. meantime, 
amiens, raked over by aeroplanes almost every hour, was being wrecked 
and strangled and all the labour corps, which, from the soldiers 
point of view, could have been better used in saving poor privates 
cruel fatigues, were working day and night at railway diversions and 
doublings that, by some route or another, should bring the urgent 
supplies of both french and british armies to their destinations. 
men argued, therefore, that the first job to be taken in hand 
would be the deliverance of amiens. there was talk, too, that all 
french divisions in flanders were withdrawn and concentrated behind 
amiens city. this might be taken for a sign that the lys salient 
was reckoned reasonably secure, and as confirming the belief that 
upon the lys, also, we had abundance of artillery. on the other 
hand these are but a few of the rumours of the time, away in the 
unknown southeast of france, where few british troops had penetrated 
in the memory of present fighting men, some five or six divisions, 
making the ninth british corps, had been sent for a rest after the 
march push, and had been badly mauled by a sudden surpriseattack 
on the aisne where, together with the fifth french army, they had 
been driven back towards the marne, which all the world thought was 
a river and a battle long since disposed of. the enemy there were 
sitting practically outside the forest of villerscotterts, a name 
also belonging to ancient history. muchenduring men, whom fate 
till now had spared, recounted how the 4th guards brigade, as it 
was then, had first caught it there, among the beechtrees very 
nearly four years back. moreover, there was fresh trouble between 
montdidier and noyon, where the enemy were again throwing themselves 
at the french. then, too, foch, who was in charge of all, but who, so 
far, had made no sign, had borrowed four more of our divisionsthe 
whole of the twentysecond corps this timeand they were off on some 
french front, heaven and headquarters alone knew where. likewise one 
composite scrum of french, american, english, and italian troops 
was holding, it might be hoped, a german capital attack near rheims. 
the old warline that in the remote days of winter would have called 
itself the somme front discussed and digested these news and many 
more. there was nothing doing on their beat to write home about, 
even were they allowed to do so. the question was whether they would 
be called on to repair to the lys and free hazebrouck, which was 
undoubtedly still in a dangerous position, or stand still and await 
what might befall at amiens. there was no limit to speculation and 
argument any more than there had been when the somme front went in 
march, and the more they argued the more confused men grew over the 
confidential information that was supplied them. them genrals, and 
their staffs must ha done quite a little lyineven for them. they 
had us believin their word ive heard since even jerry believed 
em. 

that would appear to have been the trouble with the enemy. it was 
evident to the most hardened pessimist that a french counterattack 
launched out of the villerscotterts forests, to begin with and 
in several other places at, apparently, the same time, was not 
the flashinthepan that some people foretold. for the second time 
the enemy was withdrawing from the marne, and, under pressure, 
continuing his withdrawal. his great attack near rheims, too, seemed 
to have stuck. on the lys, from time to time, sites of villages with 
wellremembered names were occasionally returning to their lawful 
trustees. hopeful students of the war hinted that, with fresh troops 
in vast numbers, more guns, and a share of luck, 1918 might see the 
foundations laid for a really effective finish in 1919. a report 
had come up from the south that the french down amiens way had made 
an experimental attack, or rather a big raid, on the enemy, and had 
found him there curiously soft and willing to shift. 

the air thickened with lies as the men, who moved about the earth 
by night or under cover, increased, and our aircraft were told off 
to circle low and noisily at certain points and drown the churn of 
many tanks trailing up into their appointed areas. all the canadian 
divisions, men said, were moving off to recapture kemmel hill. all 
our forces round amiens were digging themselves in, said others, 
preparatory to a waitandsee campaign that would surely last till 
christmas. for proof, it was notorious that our guns in that sector 
were doing nothing. as a matter of fact they were registering on the 
sly. everybody round amiens, a third party insisted, would be sent 
off in a day or two to help the french in champagne. the weaknesses 
of human nature in possession of exclusive information played into 
the hands of the very few who knew, and young staff officers of 
innocent appearance infernally bamboozled their betters. 

so it happened, on the 4th august, on a misty dawn, that the fourth 
army rawlinsons with four hundred tanks, backed by two thousand 
guns, and covered by aeroplanes to a number not yet conceived in 
war, declared itself as in being round amiens at the very nose of 
the great german salient. in twentyfour hours that attack had 
bitten in five miles on an elevenmile front, had taken twelve 
thousand prisoners and some three hundred guns, and was well set to 
continue. at the same time the french, striking up from the south, 
had cleared their front up to the amiensroye road from pierrepont, 
through plessier to fresnoy, and had taken over three thousand 
prisoners and many guns. caught thus on two fronts, the enemy fell 
back, abandoning stores and burning dumps, which latter sight it 
cheered our men to watch. but the work and the honour of the day, as 
of the fourth armys campaign from this point on, rested with the 
canadian and australian divisions who made up the larger part of it. 
the australians sir archibald montgomery describes in his monumental 
story of the fourth army as always inquisitive and seldom idle. 
the canadians had exactly the same failings, and between the two 
dominions the enemy suffered. by the 12th august he had been forced 
back on to the edge of the used, desolate, and eatenup country where 
he had established himself in 1916a jungle of old wire, wrecked 
buildings, charred woods, and wildernesses of trench. it was ideal 
ground for machinegun defence with good protection against tanks 
and cavalry. there he went to earth, and there, after a little 
feeling along his line, was he left while the screw was applied 
elsewhere. our front at that time ran from braysursomme due south 
to andechy, where we joined the french almost within machinegun 
range of roye. 

north of bray, to the western edge of the town of albert, the left 
wing of the fourth army had the enemy held, worried and expectant. 
now was the third armys turn to drive in the wedge, from north of 
albert up the line to arras where the right of the first army would 
assist. what headquarters knew of the enemys morale on that sector 
was highly satisfactory. moreover, he was withdrawing out of his lys 
salient as his divisions were sucked down south to make up wastage 
there. but our men still expected that they would tramp their weary 
way back across every yard of their battlefields and burialgrounds 
of the past two years, finishing up, if luck held, somewhere round 
the hindenburg line by christmas. that the wave, once launched, would 
carry to the rhine was beyond the wildest dreams. 

the battalion, after their little raid already mentioned, had spent 
from the 5th to the 9th august in reservetrenches at ransart, doing 
musketry and routemarching. they returned to the supporttrenches at 
hendecourtlesransart relieving the 2nd coldstream, and stayed there 
till the 16th august, when they relieved the same battalion in the 
front line opposite boiryst. martin. 

they had to patrol the no mans land in front of them a good deal 
at night because it would, later, be their formingup area, but 
suffered nothing worse than the usual shelling and trenchmortaring, 
and their share in the work of the opening day, august 21, was small 
and simple. at 5 a. m. the 2nd guards brigade on our right attacked 
moyenville with their objective just east of the railway. the 1st 
coldstream was next on our right. there was a thick fog when the 
barrage opened, as well as a smoke barrage. the tanks forming up made 
noise enough to wake a land full of germans, but apparently drew 
no fire till they were well away, lunging and trampling over the 
enemy machinegunposts that had annoyed our folk for so long. the 
only serious work for the battalion was to secure a small trench, 
cover the north side of the railway with their fire, and establish 
a post at the railway crossing as soon as a tank had passed over. 
the trench had been occupied early in the night after a small 
bombingbrawl with the enemy. the tank detailed to pass by that way 
in the morning was warned of the occupation and told not to fire into 
it as it came along and all was well. there was an idea that a couple 
of companies assisted by eight tanks should capture hamelincourt, 
a mile east of moyenville, which latter had been taken, before the 
fog lifted, by the 2nd guards brigade. but this was cancelled after 
much waste of time, and the battalion lay still under a shelling of 
mustardgas, and pleasantly watched prisoners being sent back. 

the enemys front was giving before the attack of eight divisions, 
but not without sudden and awkward resistances, due to the cutup 
and trenched state of the ground, that hid too many machineguns for 
comfort and the gasnuisance grew steadily worse. 

the battalion lay where they were the next day august 22, but sent 
out a patrol under 2nd lieutenant faraday to work up a trench near 
hamel switch, to the north of hamelincourt. after capturing four 
germans it came under machinegun fire from hamelincourt. a platoon 
was sent to support it, but was withdrawn as the hamelincourt attack 
had been postponed till the next day. then the patrol had to retire 
across abominable shallow trenches, clogged with wire and lavishly 
machinegunned. the germans tried to cut them off. they withdrew, 
fighting. their lewisgun was knocked out and five men wounded. while 
these were being helped back, the lieutenant and two men, sergeant 
dolan and private tait, covered the retreat among the wire. next, 
faraday was wounded badly in the foot, and the sergeant and private 
carried him in turn, he being six feet long and not narrow, while the 
rest of the party threw bombs at the germans, and tried to close with 
them. eventually they all reached home safe. dolans one comment on 
the affair was tis heavy going out yonder. lieutenant faraday was 
awarded the m.c. and dolan the d.c.m. later on, in 1919, dolan also 
received the mdaille militaire for gallantry on many occasions. 

seen against the gigantic background of the opening campaign, it was 
a microscopical affaira struggle of ants round a single grainbut 
it moved men strongly while they watched. 

for the reason that always leads a battalion to be hardest worked 
on the edge of battle, they were taken out of the line on the 23rd, 
cautiously, under gas and common shell, and marched back seven miles 
in five hours to berlesaubois behind monchyaubois in order to 
be marched back again next day to boiryst. martin, where they spent 
the day in the cojeul valley, and afterwards august 25 moved up 
into support in the hamel switch between hamelincourt and st. lger. 
hamelincourt had been taken on the 23rd by the 2nd brigade, and as 
the night came down wet, the men made what shelters they could from 
corrugated iron and wood lying about. the trenches hereabouts had 
every disadvantage that could be desired. some were part of the army 
line and had been dug a foot or two deep with the spade as lines to 
be developed in case of need. presumably, it was nobodys business 
to complete them, so when the trouble arrived, these gutters, being 
officially trenches, were duly filled by the troops, and as duly 
shelled by the enemy. 

for example, when the battalion moved forward on the 26th their 
trenches were waistdeep, which, to men who had spent most of the day 
in the dry bed of the cojeul river, under gas and common shell, was 
no great treat. 

illustration 

  the final advance 
  augustnovember 1918 
  route of the first battalion 

  emery walker ltd. del. et sc. 

printed in great britain by emery walker ltd., london 

since the 21st august the guards division had been well employed. its 
2nd brigade, with the second division on its right, had captured the 
ablainzevellemoyenneville spur and the second division had taken 
courcelles. by the night of the 23rd, when the 3rd guards brigade 
relieved the 2nd, and the second division had captured ervillers on 
the arrasbapaume road, the guards division, with their 1st brigade 
in support, was within half a mile of st. lger, and in touch with 
the fiftysixth division on their left, which was trying to work 
round the head of the hindenburg line and turn in from the north. at 
this point resistance stiffened. the hilly ground, cut and crosscut 
with old trenches and the beginnings of new ones, lent itself to 
the stopping game of wellplaced machineguns equally from round 
croisilles, where the fiftysixth division was engaged from about 
st. lger wood, where the 3rd guards brigade, supported by tanks, 
was renewing its acquaintance with the german antitankrifle 
and from mory, where the sixtysecond division was delayed by the 
division on its right being held up. an enemy balloon or two hung on 
the horizon and some inquisitive, lowflying aeroplanes hinted at 
coming trouble. the line expected as much, but they did not seem so 
well informed farther back. 


the affair of st. lger 

on the 26th august orders arrived that the 1st guards brigade would 
now take up the running from the 3rd, and advance eastward from 
st. lger towards ecoust till opposition was met. there were, of 
course, refinements on this idea, but that was the gist of it. 
the 2nd grenadiers and the 2nd coldstream would attack, with the 
battalion in support. the men were in their trenches by teatime on 
the 26th, no. 1 company in jewel trench just east of the entrance to 
the little sense river valley, and the others disposed along the 
line of mory switch, an old trench now only a foot deep. battalion 
headquarters lay in an abandoned german stores dugout. final orders 
did not arrive till after midnight on the 26th, and there was much 
to arrange and link up between then and seven oclock, barrage time. 
the grenadiers were on the right and the coldstream on the left of 
the battalion, the latter following a quarter of a mile behind, with 
nos. 1 and 3 companies to feed the grenadiers and nos. 4 and 2 for 
the coldstream. as the front was so wide, they split the difference 
and kept as close as might be to the dividing line between the two 
leading battalions, which ran by mory switch and hally avenue. the 
hot day broke with a gorgeous sunrise over a desolate landscape that 
reeked in all its hollows of gas and cordite. a moment or two after 
our barrage fieldguns only opened, the enemy put down a heavy 
reply, and into the smoke and dust of it the companies, in artillery 
formation, walked up the road without hesitation or one man losing 
his place. no. 1 company leading on the right disappeared at once 
after they had passed their jumpingoff point at mory switch. almost 
the first shells caught the leading platoon, when lieutenant j. 
n. ward was killed and lieutenant p. s. macmahon wounded. as soon 
as they were clear of the barrage, they came under full blast of 
machinegun fire and saw the grenadiers presently lie down enfiladed 
on both flanks. four of our machineguns tried to work forward 
and clear out the hindrances, but the fire was too strong. both 
battalions were finally held up, and the grenadiers were practically 
cut to pieces, with their reserve companies, as these strove to 
reinforce the thinned line. after what seemed an immense time two 
hours or so captain thompson, seeing that, as far as that sector 
was concerned, the thing was hung up, ordered his men to dig in in 
support, and they spent till nightfall recovering casualtiestheir 
own, those of the battalions ahead, and of the guards machineguns. 

no. 3 company, which followed no. 1, suffered just as heavily from 
the barrage. very soon their commander, captain joyce, was wounded 
and lieutenant h. r. baldwin killed. second lieutenant heaton, who 
took over, was gassed in the course of the afternoon, and c.s.m. 
ohara then commanded. there was nothing for them to do either save 
dig in, like no. 1, behind the grenadiers, and a little to the right 
of them. 

no. 4 company, under captain hegarty, following the coldstream, 
got the worst barrage of all as soon as they were clear of their 
trenches, and found the coldstream held up, front and flank, within 
fifty yards of the sunken road whence they had started. no. 15 
platoon of the irish guards was almost wiped out, and the remains of 
it joined with no. 13 to make a defensive flank, while no. 14 crawled 
or wriggled forward to reinforce the coldstream, and no. 16 lay in 
reserve in a sunk road. sunk roads were the only shelter for such as 
did not wish to become early casualties. 

no. 2 company captain a. paget following no. 4 had been held back 
for a few minutes by the c.o. major r. baggallay on the fringe 
of the barrage, to be slipped through when it seemed to lighten. 
they also launched out into a world that was all flank or support, 
of battalions which could neither be seen nor found, who were 
themselves outflanked by machineguns in a landscape that was one 
stumblingblock of shallow trenches which suddenly faded out. they 
crossed the st. lgervraucourt road and bore east, after clearing 
the st. lger wood, till they reached the st. lger reserve trench, 
and held it from the longatte road to where it joined the banks 
reserve. says one record at this time, captain paget was in 
ignorance of the success or location of the attacking battalions, and 
both of his flanks exposed as far as he knew. the enemy machineguns 
were hammering home that knowledge, and one of the platoons had lost 
touch altogether, and was out in the deadly open. so in the trench 
they lay till an officer of the coldstream came over and told paget 
the general situation, which, unofficially, ran this show is held 
up. he borrowed a section from no. 5 platoon to help to build up 
a flank to guard the east side of st. lger and vanished among the 
increasing shellholes. 

well on in the morning a message arrived from captain hegarty, no. 
4 company, that he and his men were on the st. lgervraucourt road 
and held up like the rest. captain paget went over, in the usual way, 
by a series of bolts from shellhole to shellhole, trying to clear 
up an only tooclear situation. on the way he found a lost platoon, 
sent it to dig in on the left of no. 2 company, and also saw the 
c.o. 2nd coldstream and explained his own dispositions. they were 
not made too soon, for in a short time there was an attack on no. 2 
company which came within sixty yards before it was broken up by our 
smallarm fire. the germans were followed up as they returned across 
the ecoustmory ridge by longrange shooting in which, for the sake 
of economy, captured enemy rifles and ammunition were used. 

by this time the whole front was split up into small or large 
scattered posts in trenches or under cover, each held down by 
machineguns which punished every movement. two companies 2 and 
4 were near the st. lger trees, a clump of nine trees on the st. 
lgerecoust road, mixed up with the coldstream posts. the other 
two were dug in behind the grenadiers on the right. battalion 
headquarters circulated spasmodically and by rushes, when it saw its 
chance, from one point to the other of the most unwholesome ground. 
even at the time, some of its shellhole conferences struck the 
members as comic but history does not record the things that were 
said by dripping officers between mouthfuls of dirt and gas. 

every battle has its special characteristic. st. lger was one of 
heat, sunshine, sweat the flavour of at least two gases tasted 
through respirators or in the raw the wail of machinegun bullets 
sweeping the crests of sunken roads the sudden vision of wounded 
in stillsmoking shellholes or laid in the sides of a scarp sharp 
whiffs of newspilt blood, and here and there a face upon which the 
sun stared without making any change. so the hours wore on, under a 
sense of space, heat, and light death always just over the edge of 
that space and impudently busy in that light. 

about what would have been teatime in the real world, captain 
paget, a man of unhurried and careful speech and imperturbable soul, 
reported to the c.o., whom he found by the st. lger trees, that 
there were huns on his rightsame trench as himself. it was an 
awkward situation that needed mending before dusk, and it was made 
worse by the posts of the coldstream and some guards machineguns 
posts, as well as those of our no. 4 company, being mixed up within 
close range of no. 2. the c.o. decided that if a barrage could be 
brought to bear on the trench and its rather crowded neighbourhood, 
no. 2 might attack it. a young gunner, fowler by name, cast up at 
that juncture and said it might be managed if the battalion withdrew 
their posts round the area. he had a telephone, still uncut, to 
his guns and would observe their registration himself. the posts, 
including those of the guards machineguns, were withdrawn, and 
fowler was as near as might be killed by one of his own registering 
shots. he got his 18pounders to his liking at last, and ten minutes 
brisk barrage descended on the trench. when it stopped, and before 
our men could move, up went a white flag amid yells of kamerad, and 
the huns came out, hands aloft, to be met by our men, who, forgetting 
that exposed troops, friend and foe alike, would certainly be gunned 
by the nearest enemypost, had to be shooed and shouted back to cover 
by their officers. the prisoners, ninety of them, were herded into 
a wood, where they cast their helmets on the ground, laughed, and 
shook hands with each other, to the immense amusement of our people. 
the capture had turned a very blank day into something of a success, 
and the irish were grateful to the bag. this at least explains 
the politeness of the orderly who chaperoned rather than conducted 
the hun officer to the rear, with many a this way, sir. mind out, 
now, sir, you dont slip down the bank. they put a platoon into the 
captured trench and lay down to a night of bursts of heavy shelling. 
but the enemy, whether because of direct pressure or because they had 
done their delaying work, asked for no more and drew back in the dark. 

when morning of the 28th broke few signs of enemy movement were 
observed. men say that there is no mistaking the feel of the 
front under this joyous aspect. the sense of constriction departs 
as swiftly as a headache, and with it, often, the taste that was in 
the mouth. one by one, as the lovely day went on, the patrols from 
the companies made their investigations and reports, till at last 
the whole line reformed and, in touch on either flank, felt forward 
under light shelling from withdrawing guns. an aeroplane dropped some 
bombs on the battalion as it drew near to the st. lger trees, which 
wounded two men and two gunner officers, one of whomnot fowler, 
the boy who arranged for the barragedied in father brownes arms. 
on the road at that point, where the wounded and dying of the fight 
had been laid, only dried pools of blood and some stained cottonwads 
remained darkening in the sun. such officers as the gas had affected 
in that way went about their routinework vomiting disgustedly at 
intervals. 

battalion headquarters, which had nominally spent the previous day in 
a waistdeep trench, set up office at the st. lger trees, and the 
advance of the guards division continued for a mile or so. then, on a 
consolidated line, with machineguns chattering to the eastward, it 
waited to be relieved. as prelude to their watch on the rhine, the 
affair was not auspicious. the grenadiers, on whom the brunt of the 
fight fell, were badly knocked out, and of their sixteen officers but 
four were on their feet. the coldstream were so weakened that they 
borrowed our no. 4 company to carry on with, and the irish thought 
themselves lucky to have lost no more than two officers lieutenant 
j. n. ward and lieutenant h. r. baldwin dead, and six wounded or 
gassed, in addition to a hundred and seventy other ranks killed or 
wounded. the wounded officers were captain w. joyce lieutenants p. 
s. macmahon and c. a. j. vernon, who was incapacitated for a while 
by teargas in the middle of action and led away blinded and very 
wroth also 2nd lieutenants h. a. connolly, g. t. heaton, and a. e. 
hutchinson. 

the division was relieved on the night of the 28th the battalion 
itself, as far as regarded no. 1 company, by the 1st gordons, from 
the third division, nos. 2 and 4 companies by another battalion, and 
no. 3 company under the orders of the 2nd grenadiers. they marched 
back to their positions of the night before the battle very glad 
that it was all behind us, and their shelters of bits of wood and 
rough iron seemed like rest in a fair land. 

on the 29th august, a hot day, they lay in old trenches over the 
moyenneville spur in front of adinfer wood facing douchy and ayette, 
where three weeks ago no man could have lived. they talked together 
of the faroff times when they held that line daily expecting the 
enemy advance and the officers lay out luxuriously in the wood in 
the evening after mess, while the men made themselves little homes 
in it. 

next day they rested, for the men were very tired, and on the last 
of the month the whole battalion was washed in the divisional baths 
that had established themselves at adinfer. but the enemy had not 
forgotten them, and on the first of september their shelters and 
tents in the delightful wood were bombed. six men were injured, five 
being buried in a trench, and of these two were suffocated before 
they could be dug out. 


towards the canal du nord 

and that was all the rest allowed to the battalion. on the 2nd 
september the canadian corps of the first army broke that outlying 
spur of the hindenburg system known as the drocourtquant switch, 
with its wires, trenches, and posts and the fiftyseventh and 
fiftysecond divisions, after hard work, equally smashed the 
triangle of fortifications northwest of quant where the switch 
joined the system. the gain shook the whole of the hindenburg line 
south of quant and, after five days cleanup behind the line, the 
guards division were ordered to go in again at the very breast of 
hindenburgs works. no one knew what the enemys idea might be, but 
there was strong presumption that, if he did not hold his defence at 
that point, he might crack. but, yell understand, for all that, we 
did not believe jerry would crack past mendin. 

the battalion spent the night of the 2nd september, then, in shelters 
in hamel switch trench on their way back from adinfer wood to the 
battle. the front had now shifted to very much the one as we held 
in april, 191z, ere the days of cambrai and bourlon wood. the 1st 
guards brigade were in divisional reserve at lagnicourt, three miles 
southwest of ecoustst.mein, where the battalion had to cross their 
still fresh battlefield of less than a week back, as an appetizer to 
their hot dinners. they occupied a waistdeep old trench, a little 
west of lagnicourt, and noticed that there was no shelling, though 
the roads were full of our traffic, a good deal of it in full view 
of bourlon wood. going over used ground for the third time and 
noting ones many dead comrades does not make for high spirit even 
though ones own divisional general has written ones own brigadier, 
all battalions of the 1st guards brigade discharged their duty 
splendidly at st. lger. 

lagnicourt was shelled a little by a highvelocity gun between the 
4th and the 6th of september, and seventeen bombs were dropped on the 
battalion, wounding two men. 

by all reason there should have been a bitter fight on that ground, 
and full preparation for it was made. but the enemy, after st. lger, 
saw fit to withdraw himself suddenly and unexpectedly out of all that 
area. for one bewildering dawn and day the bottom fell out of the 
front, as far as the guards division was concerned. it is a curious 
story, even though it does not directly concern the battalion. here 
is one detail of it 

on the 3rd september the 2nd brigade toiled in from monchy, in full 
warkit, and, tired with the long days heat, formed up west of 
lagnicourt before dawn, detailed to win, if they could, a thousand 
yards or so of chewedup ground. they went over the top under 
a creeping barrage, one gun of which persistently fired short, 
andfound nothing whatever in front of them save a prodigious number 
of dead horses, some few corpses, and an intolerable buzzing of 
flies as they topped the ridge above lagnicourt, they saw against 
the first light of the sun, dump after german dump blazing palely 
towards the east. that was all. they wandered, wondering, into a 
vast, grassy, habitationless plain that stretched away towards 
the bapaumecambrai road. not a machinegun broke the stupefying 
stillness from any fold of it. yet it was the very place for such 
surprises. aeroplanes swooped low, looked them well over, and skimmed 
off. no distant guns opened. the advance became a routemarch, a 
sunday walkout, edged with tense suspicion. they saw a german 
cooker wrecked on the grass, and, beside it, the bodies of two 
clean, goodlooking boys, pathetically laid out as for burial. the 
thing was a boobytrap arranged to move our peoples pity. some 
pitied, and were blown to bits by the concealed mine. no one made any 
comment. they were tired with carrying their kit in the sun among 
the maddening flies. the thousand yards stretched into miles. twice 
or thrice they halted and began to dig in for fear of attack. but 
nothing overtook them and they installed themselves, about dusk, in 
some old british trenches outside boursies, four miles and more, as 
the crow flies, from lagnicourt at midnight, up came their rations, 
and the punctual homeletters, across that enchanted desert which had 
spared them. they were told that their brigade artillery was in place 
behind the next rise, ready to deliver barrages on demand, and in due 
course the whole of our line on that sector flowed forward. 

the battalion relieved the 1st scots guards in the front line near 
muvres on the ztha quiet relief followed by severe gassing. here 
they passed two days in the delicate and difficult business of 
feeling all about them among the mass of old trenches, to locate 
enemys posts and to watch what points of vantage might offer. the 
wreckage of the houses round muvres, into which the trenches ran, 
lent itself excellently to enemy activity and men played blindmans 
buff round bits of broken walls wherever they explored. their left 
was in the air their right under the care of providence and their 
supports were far off. no. 3 company captain g. l. bambridge, 
m.c., while trying to close a gap between the two front companies 3 
and 1 by peaceful penetration with a bombingparty, found enemy in 
the trench, drove him up it as far as they could, built a barricade, 
and were then heavily counterraided by a couple of officers and 
twenty men whom they ejected after, as the company justly owned, a 
good attempt. the enemy attempted again about midnight on the 8th, 
when he was bombed off, and again on the afternoon of the 9th in an 
outlying trench, mixed up with smashed cellars and broken floors, 
where he captured two unarmed stretcherbearers and three men who 
had not been in the line before. though it does new hands no harm 
to realize that frontline trenches are not warley barracks and 
stretcherbearers, like orderlies, are prey to all the world, still 
the matter could not be passed over. our trenchmortars attended 
vigorously to the enemy posts whence the raid had been launched, and 
in the afternoon sent a strong patrol to make the outraged trench 
secure. later on, a platoon of no. 1 company got into touch with 
the battalion 8th kings on their left, and took part in a small 
bicker, as it was described, but with no casualties. 

they were relieved the same night, though they did not expect it, by 
the 15th battalion loyal north lancs who had not made sure of their 
route beforehand, and so, in wet darkness, lost their way, failed 
to meet the guides at the rendezvous, and were heavily shelled. 
the relief dragged on till well towards dawn, when the battalions 
straggled off into some drenching trenches without any sort of 
accommodation. the whole thing the most appalling mess and agony 
i have ever experienced. the worst was when a stray light went up 
and showed the relieved battalion under pouring rain playing follow 
my leader in a complete circle like caterpillars, in the hopeful 
belief that they were moving to their destination. they next took the 
place of the 3rd guards brigade in reservetrenches near edinburgh 
support, where they stayed till the 14th september and were not even 
once shelled. salvage and cleaning up was their fatiguea dreadful 
job at any time, for the ground was filled with ancient offal as 
well as newlost french of 14 mingled grotesquely with the raw 
produce of yesterdays bombingraid. yet mens feelings blunt so by 
use that they will scavenge yard by yard over the very clay of the 
pit into which they themselves may at any instant be stamped, nor 
turn a hair at shapes made last year in their likeness. the battalion 
was complimented by its majorgeneral on the extent and neatness of 
its dump. no mere campaigning interferes with the armys passion 
for elaborate economies. a little before this, the entire british 
expeditionary force was exhorted to collect and turn in all solder 
from bullybeef tins and the like. naturally, the thing became a game 
with betting on results between corps but when a dark, elderly, 
brooding private of the irish spent three hours stalking a coldstream 
cooker with intent to convey and melt it down, every one felt it had 
gone far enough. 

on the 15th september they relieved the 1st scots guards in the old 
trenches west of lagnicourt. there they managed to put in a little 
boxrespirator drill which at the best is a dry fatigue, but, be it 
noted with gratitude, beer was obtained for the men and sent up from 
transportlines. the whole area reeked of the various gases which 
the enemy were distributing with heavies. they hung in the hollows 
and were sucked up by the days heat, and no time or place was safe 
from them. gasdiscipline had to be insisted on strongly, for even 
veterans grow careless of a foe they cannot see and the new hands 
are like croupy babies. 

on the 1zth september they relieved the 2nd scots guards in support, 
and no. 2 company took over from a company of the welsh guards. their 
trenches were in what had been the british front line of the old 
timefish avenue, sprat post, shark support, rat and rabbit avenue, 
and so forth. 

there was desultory shelling on the morning of the 18th, and 
heavier work in the afternoon, causing six casualties, and slightly 
wounding captain vernon, intelligence officer. then the silence 
of preparation for battle falls on the record. it was nothing to 
the battalion that on the 18th september the enemy apparently 
attacked south of the divisional front along the bapaumecambrai 
road. the dead must bury their dead on the somme. they had their 
own dispositions to arrange and rearrange, as men, for one cause or 
other, fell out and no unit could afford to take chances, with the 
hindenburg line ahead of them. an we knowin we was told off to 
cross that dirty ditch in front of em all. their world, as with 
every other division, was limited to the reserves behind them, who 
should come up to make good their casualties their trenchmortar 
batteries alongside them and their own selves about to be used in 
what promised to be one of the bloodiest shows of the war. 

those who were for the front line enjoyed a week to work and think 
things over. those who were set aside for the second course were 
bombed by night andwent mushroompicking in backareas between 
parades, or played riotous cricketmatches with petroltins for 
wickets 

their divisional commander, majorgeneral feilding, had left on 
september 11 to succeed sir francis lloyd in command of the london 
district, and general t. g. matheson, c.b., had been appointed to 
the command of the guards division. the battalion was full strength, 
officers and men, for there had been little during the past month to 
pull it down. 


the crossing of the canal du nord 

operations against the hindenburg line were to open on the 2zth 
september with the attack of fourteen divisions of the first and 
third armies on a twelvemile front from opposite gouzeaucourt in 
the south to opposite sauchylestre, sister to sauchycauchyunder 
the marshes of the sense river in the north. it would be heralded 
by two days solid bombardment along the entire fronts of the first, 
third, and fourth armies, so that the enemy might be left guessing 
which was to hit first. when the first and third armies were well 
home, the fourth would attend to the german position in the south, 
and heave the whole thing backward. 

the share of the guards division in the northern attack was to cross 
the canal du nord at lock seven, north of havrincourt, on a front of 
a mile then work through the complicated tangle of the hindenburg 
support line directly east along the ridge from flesquires village 
to premy chapel which stands at the junction of the roads from 
noyelles, marcoing, and graincourt, and to consolidate on the line 
of the marcoinggraincourt road. meantime, the third division on 
their right would take the village of flesquires the fiftysecond 
division would take the hindenburg line that lay west of the canal 
in the bend of it, and would then let the sixtythird through who 
would swing down from the north and attend to graincourt and anneux 
villages. the total advance set for the guards division was three 
miles, but, if the operations were fully successful, they were to 
push on to the outskirts of noyelles the third division to marcoing 
while the fiftyseventh, coming through the sixtythird, would take 
cantaing and fontainenotredame. in the guards division itself, the 
2nd brigade was to move off first, and ferret its way through a knot 
of heavily wired trenches that lay between them and the canal, take 
the hindenburg support trenches, and then form a defensive flank to 
the left of the next advance till the fiftysecond and sixtythird 
divisions should have secured graincourt. the 1st brigade would pass 
through them and capture the trenches across the canal to the north 
and northeast of flesquires. if resistance were not too strong, 
that brigade was to go on to the spur running from flesquires to 
cantaing, and help the sixtythird turn the graincourt line. the 3rd 
brigade, passing through the 1st, would carry on and take the high 
ground round premy chapel. 

enough rain fell the day before to grease the ground uncomfortably, 
and when at 3.30 a. m. the irish guards moved off from their reserve 
trenches west of lagnicourt to their assembly positions along the 
demicourtgraincourt road to bullen trench, the jumpingoff place, 
it was pouring wet. they were not shelled on the way up, but the 
usual nightwork was afoot in the backareas, and though our guns, 
as often the case on the eve of an outbreak, held their breath, 
the enemys artillery threatened in the distance, and the lights 
and flaming onions marked their expectant front. just before the 
battalion reached the ruins of demicourt, there was an explosion 
behind them, and they saw, outlined against the flare of a blazing 
dump, lagnicourt way, a fat and foolish observationballoon rocking 
and ducking at the end of its tether, with the air of a naughty 
baby caught in the act of doing something it shouldnt. since the 
thing was visible over half a department, they called it names, but 
it made excuse for a little talk that broke the tension. tea and 
rum were served out at the first halta ritual with its usual grim 
jestsand when they reached the road in front of demicourt, they 
perceived the balloon had done its dirty work too well. the enemy, 
like ourselves, changes his fieldlights on occasion, but, on all 
occasions, two red lights above and one below mean trouble. up go 
the bloody pawnbrokers said a man who knew what to expect, and, as 
soon as the ominous glares rose, the german trenchmortars opened 
on the battalion entering the communicationway that led to bullen 
trench. our barrage came down at zero 5.20 more terrifically, men 
said, than ever they had experienced, and was answered by redoubled 
defensive barrages. after that, speech was cut off. some fifty yards 
ahead of bullen trenchwhich, by the way, was only three feet 
deeplay the 1st scots guards, the first wave of the attack. on, 
in front of, and in the space between them and the irish, fell the 
rain of the trenchmortars from the rear, the guards machineguns 
tortured all there was of unoccupied air with their infernal 
clamours. the scots guards went over among the shellspouts and 
jerking wires at the first glimmer of dawn, the irish following in a 
rush. the leading companies were no. 3 lieutenant h. a. a. collett 
on the left, and no. 4 2nd lieutenant c. s. obrien on the right. 
the 1st guards trench mortar battery 2nd lieutenant o. r. baldwin, 
irish guards was attached experimentally to no. 3 company in the 
first wave instead of, as usual, in support. no. 2 company captain 
c. w. w. bencejones supported no. 3, and no. 1 lieutenant the hon. 
b. a. a. ogilvy no. 4. they stayed for a moment in the trench, a 
deep, wide one of the hindenburg pattern, which the scots guards had 
left. it was no healthy spot, for the shells were localised here and 
the dirt flung up all along it in waves. men scrambled out over the 
sliding, flying edges of it, saw a bank heave up in the halflight, 
and knew that, somewhere behind that, was the canal. by this time one 
of the two stokes guns of the mortar battery and half the gunners 
had been wiped out, and the casualties in the line were heavy but 
they had no time to count. then earth opened beneath their feet, 
and showed a wide, deep, dry, newly made canal with a smashed iron 
bridge lying across the bed of it, and an unfinished lock to the 
right looking like some immense engine of war ready to do hurt in 
inconceivable fashions. directly below them, on the pale, horribly 
hard, concrete trough, was a collection of agitated pinheads, the 
steel hats of the scots guards rearing ladders against the far side 
of the gulf. mixed with them were the dead, insolently uninterested, 
while the wounded, breaking aside, bound themselves up with the 
tense, silent preoccupation which unhurt men, going forward, find so 
hard to bear. mobs of bewildered germans had crawled out of their 
shelters in the canal flanks and were trying to surrender to any one 
who looked likely to attend to them. they saluted british officers as 
they raced past, and, between salutes, returned their arms stiffly 
to the safe kamerad position. this added the last touch of insanity 
to the picture. wed ha laughed if we had had the time, yell 
understand. 

none recall precisely how they reached the bottom of the canal, but 
there were a few moments of blessed shelter ere they scrambled out 
and reformed on the far side. the shelling here was bad enough, but 
nothing to what they had survived. a veil of greasy smoke, patched 
with flame that did not glare, stood up behind them, and through 
the pall of it, in little knots, stumbled their supports, blinded, 
choking, gasping. in the direction of the attack, across a long 
stretch of broken rising ground, were more shells, but less thickly 
spaced, and craters of stinking earth and coloured chalks where our 
barrage had ripped out nests of machineguns. far off, to the left, 
creaming with yellow smoke in the morning light, rose the sullen head 
of bourlon wood to which the canadians were faithfully paying the 
debt contracted by the 2nd battalion of the irish guards in the old 
days after cambrai. 

at the crest of the ascent lay saunders keep, which marked the point 
where the scots guards would lie up and the irish come through. 
already the casualties had been severe. captain bencejones and 
2nd lieutenant mathieson of no. 2 company were wounded at the keep 
itself, and 2nd lieutenant a. r. boyle of no. 1 earlier in the rush. 
the companies panted up, gapped and strung out. from the keep the 
land sloped down to stafford alley, the battalions first objective 
just before which lieutenant barry close was killed. that day marked 
his coming of age. beyond the alley the ground rose again, and here 
the irish were first checked by some machinegun fire that had 
escaped our barrages. second lieutenant obrien, no. 3 company, was 
hit at this point while getting his men forward. he had earned his 
military cross in may, and he died well. the next senior officer, 
2nd lieutenant e. h. r. burke, was away to the left in the thick of 
the smoke with a platoon that, like the rest, was fighting for its 
life so 2nd lieutenant ofarrell led on. he was hit not far from 
stafford alley, and while his wound was being bandaged by sergeant 
regan, hit again by a bullet that, passing through the sergeants 
cap and a finger, entered ofarrells heart. the officer commanding 
the remnants of the mortar battery took on the company and his one 
gun. meantime, collett and a few of no. 3 company had reached silver 
street, a trench running forward from stafford alley, and he and 
lieutenant brady were bombing down it under heavy smallarm fire from 
the enemys left flank which had not been driven in and was giving 
untold trouble. no. 2 company, with two out of three of its officers 
down, was working towards the same line as the fragment of no. 3 
though opinion was divided on that confused field whether it would 
not be better for them to lie down and form a defensive flank against 
that pestilent left fire. eventually, but events succeeded each other 
like the bullets, collett and his men reached their last objectivea 
trench running out of silver street towards flesquires. here he, 
brady, and baldwin drew breath and tried to get at the situation. 
no. 4 company lay to the right of no. 3, and when 2nd lieutenant e. 
h. r. burke, with what was left of his platoon before mentioned, 
came up, he resumed charge of it without a word and went on. no. 1 
company lieutenant the hon. b. a. a. ogilvy had, like the rest, 
been compelled to lead its own life. its objective was the beetsugar 
factory in front of flesquires ahead of and a little to the right 
of the battalions final objective, and it was met throughout with 
rifle, bomb, and flanking fire. lieutenant ogilvy was wounded at 
a critical point in the game with the enemy well into the trench, 
or trenches. the whole ground seemed to the men who were clearing 
it one inexhaustible hunwarren. as he dropped, lieutenant r. l. 
dagger and sergeant conaboy, picking up what men they could, bombed 
the enemy out, back, and away, and settled down to dig in and wait 
always under flankfire. the sergeant was killed in his zeal to 
finish the job completelyno mean epitaph for a thorough man. by 
eleven oclock that morning all the companies had reached their 
objectives, and, though sorely harassed, began to feel that the worst 
for them might be over. there were, however, two german whizzbangs 
that lived in orival wood still untaken on the battalions left, and 
these, served with disgusting speed and accuracy, swept silver street 
mercilessly. the situation was not improved when one of the sergeants 
quoted the everfamous saying of sergeantmajor toher with reference 
to one of our own barrages and even the wurrums themselves are 
getting up and crying for mercy. the guns were near enough to watch 
quite comfortably, and while the men watched and winced, they saw 
the success signal of the canadiansthree whitesrise high in 
air in front of bourlon wood. then no. 1 company reported they were 
getting more than their share of machinegun fire, and the 1st guards 
brigade trench mortar battery, reduced to one mortar, one officer, 
one sergeant, four men, and ten shells, bestowed the whole of its 
ammunition in the direction indicated, abandoned its mortar, and 
merged itself into the ranks of no. 3 company. it had been amply 
proved that where trenchmortars accompany a first wave of attack, if 
men are hit while carrying two stokes shells apiece forty pounds of 
explosives, they become dangerous mobile mines. 

enemy aeroplanes now swooped down with machinegun fire there seemed 
no way of getting our artillery to attend to them and they pecked 
like vultures undisturbed. then battalion headquarters came up in 
the midst of the firing from the left, established themselves in 
a dugout and were at once vigorously shelled, together with the 
neighbouring aidpost and some german prisoners there, waiting to 
carry down wounded. the aidpost was in charge of a young american 
doctor, rhys davis by name, who had been attached to the battalion 
for some time. this was his first day of war and he was mortally 
wounded before the noon of it. 

the trench filled as the day went on, with details dropping in by 
devious and hurried roads to meet the continual stream of prisoners 
being handed down to brigade headquarters. one youth, who could not 
have been seventeen, flung himself into the arms of an officer and 
cried, kamerad, herr offizier ich bin sehr jung kamerad to 
whom the embarrassed islander said brutally get on with you. i 
wouldnt touch you for the world and they laughed all along the 
trenchface as they dodged the whizzbangs out of orival wood, and 
compared themselves to the wurrums begging for mercy. 

about noon, after many adventures, the 2nd grenadiers arrived 
to carry on the advance, and silver street became a congested 
metropolis. the 2nd grenadiers were hung up there for a while 
because, though the third division on the right had taken 
flesquires, the sixtythird on the left had not got graincourt 
village, which was enfilading the landscape damnably. orival wood, 
too, was untaken, and the 1st grenadiers, under lord gort, were out 
unsupported half a mile ahead on the right front somewhere near premy 
chapel. meantime, a battalion of the second division, which was to 
come through the guards division and continue the advance, flooded up 
silver street, zealously unreeling its telephone wires machinegun 
guards were there, looking for positions the 2nd grenadiers were 
standing ready the welsh guards were also there with intent to 
support the grenadiers walking wounded were coming down, and severe 
cases were being carried over the top by german prisoners who made 
no secret of an acute desire to live and jumped in among the rest 
without leave asked. the men compared the crush to a sugarqueue at 
home. to cap everything, some wandering tanks which had belonged to 
the division on the right had strayed over to the left. no german 
battery can resist tanks, however disabled so they drew fire, and 
when they were knocked out our people did not know this at first, 
being unused to working with them, made life insupportable with 
petrolfumes for a hundred yards round. 

about halfpast four in the afternoon a guards battalionthey 
thought it was the 1st coldstreamcame up on their left, and under 
cover of what looked like a smokebarrage, cleared orival wood and 
silenced the two guns there. the irish, from their dresscircle in 
silver street, blessed them long and loud, and while they applauded, 
lieut.colonel lord gort, commanding the 1st grenadiers, came down 
the trench wounded on his way to a dressingstation. he had been 
badly hit once before he thought fit to leave duty, and was suffering 
from loss of blood. the irish had always a great regard for him, and 
that day they owed him more than they knew at the time, for it was 
the advance of the 1st grenadiers under his leading, almost up to 
premy chapel, which had unkeyed the german resistance in graincourt, 
and led the enemy to believe their line of retreat out of the village 
was threatened. the second division as it came through found the 
enemy shifting and followed them up towards noyelles. so the day 
closed, and, though men did not realize, marked the end of organized 
trenchwarfare for the guards division. 

the battalion, with two officers dead and five wounded out of 
fifteen killed lieutenant b. s. close, and 2nd lieutenant a. h. 
ofarrell wounded captain the hon. b. a. a. ogilvy, captain c. w. 
w. bencejones, and 2nd lieutenants a. r. boyle, g. f. mathieson, 
and c. s. obrien, m.c., died of wounds, and one hundred and eighty 
casualties in the ranks, stayed on the ground for the night. it 
tried to make itself as comfortable as cold and shallow trenches 
allowed, but by orders of some higher authority, who supposed that 
it had been relieved, no water or rations were sent up and, next 
morning, they had to march six thousand yards on empty stomachs to 
their trenchshelters and bivouacs in front of demicourt. as the last 
company arrived a cold rain fell, but they were all in reasonably 
high spirits. it had been a winning action, in spite of trenchwork, 
and men really felt that they had the running in their own hands at 
last. 

backarea rumours and official notifications were good too. the 
nineteenth and second corps of the second army, together with the 
belgian army, had attacked on the 28th september, from dixmude to far 
south of the ypreszonnebeke road had retaken all the heights to the 
east of ypres, and were in a fair way to clear out every german gain 
there of the past four years. a german withdrawal was beginning from 
lens to armentires, and to the south of the third army the fourth 
came in on the 29th while the battalion was resting and shaving 
in its trenchshelters by demicourt on a front of twelve miles, and 
from gricourt to vendhuille broke, and poured across the hindenburg 
line, then to the st. quentin canal. at the same time, lest there 
should be one furlong of the uneasy front neglected, the fifth and 
sixth corps of the third army attacked over the old gouzeaucourt 
ground between vendhuille and marcoing. this, too, without counting 
the blows that the french and the americans were dealing in their own 
spheres on the meuse and in the argonne each stroke coldly preparing 
the next. 

the germans had, during september, lost a quarter of a million 
of prisoners, several thousand guns, and immense quantities of 
irreplaceable stores. their main line of resistance was broken and 
overrun throughout and their troops in the field were feeling the 
demoralisation of constant withdrawals, as well as shortage from 
abandoned supplies. our people had known the same depression in 
the march push, when night skies, lit with burning dumps, gave the 
impression that all the world was going up in universal surrender. 


towards maubeuge 

but work was still to do. between cambrai, which at the end of 
october was under, though not actually in, our hands, and maubeuge, 
lay thirtyfive miles of france, all open save for such hastily made 
defences as the enemy had been able to throw up after the collapse 
of the hindenburg systems. there, then, the screw was turned, and 
on the 8th october the third and fourth armies attacked on a front 
of seventeen miles from sequehart, north of cambrai, where the 
cambraidouai road crosses the sense, southward to our junction with 
the french first army a few miles above st. quentin. twenty british 
divisions, two cavalry divisions, and one american division were 
involved. the battalion faced the changed military situation, by 
announcing that companies were at the disposal of their commanders 
for open warfare training. after which they were instantly sent 
forward from their demicourt trenches, to help make roads between 
havricourt and flesquires 

on the 3rd october they had orders to move, which were at once 
cancelledsure sign that the higher command had something on its 
mind. this was proved two days later when the same orders arrived 
again, and were again washed out. meantime, their reorganisation 
after the flesquires fight had been completed reinforcements were 
up, and the following officers had joined for duty lieutenants h. 
e. van der noot and g. f. van der noot, and 2nd lieutenants a. l. w. 
koch de gooreynd, the hon. c. a. barnewall, g. m. tyldenwright, v. 
j. s. french, and r. e. taylor. 

on the 4th october the commanding officer went on leave, and major 
a. f. l. gordon, m.c., took command of the battalion. once more it 
was warned that it would move next day, which warning this time 
came true, and was heralded by the usual conference at brigade 
headquarters, on the zth october, when the plans for next days 
battle in that sector of the line were revealed. the second division, 
on the left, and the third, on the right of the guards division, were 
to attack on the whole of the front of the sixth corps at dawn of 
the 8th october. the guards division was to be ready to go through 
these two divisions on the afternoon of that day, or to take over 
the line on the night of it, and continue the attack at dawn on the 
9th. the 1st guards brigade would pass through the third division, 
and the 2nd brigade through the second division. as far as the 1st 
brigades attack was concerned, the 2nd coldstream would take the 
right, the 2nd grenadiers the left of the line, with the 1st irish 
guards in reserve. it was all beautifully clear. so the battalion 
left demicourt, recrossed the canal du nord at lock z, and were 
accommodated in dugouts and shelters in the hindenburg line, near 
ribecourt. 

on the 9th october the battalion moved to masnires, four miles or so 
south of cambrai. here, while crossing the st. quentin canal, no. 3 
company had three killed and three wounded by a longrange gun which 
was shelling all down the line of it. they halted in the open for 
the rest of the day. a curious experience followed. the idea was to 
attack in the general direction of cattenires, across the line of 
the cambraicaudry railway, which, with its embankment and cuttings, 
was expected to give trouble. the new zealand division was then on 
the right of the guards division but no one seemed to be sure, the 
night before the battle, whether the third division was out on their 
front or not. everything, yell understand, was all loosed up in 
those days. jerry did not know his mind, and for that reason we 
could not know ours. the bottom was out of the war, yell understand, 
but we did not see it. however, it was arranged that all troops 
would be withdrawn from doubtful areas before zero 5.10 a. m., and 
that the 2nd coldstream and the 2nd grenadiers would advance to the 
attack under a creeping barrage with due precautions which included a 
plentiful bombardment and machinegunning of the railway embankment. 

the battalion, in reserve, as has been said, moved from masnires 
to its assembly area, among old german trenches near the village 
of seranvillers, in artillery formation at 2.40 a. m., and had its 
breakfast at 5 a. m., while the other two battalions of the brigade 
advanced in waves, preceded by strong patrols and backed by the guns. 
there was no shelling while they assembled, and practically none in 
reply to our barrage nor did the leading battalions meet opposition 
till after they had cleared out the village of seranvillers, and 
were held up by screened machineguns in a wood surrounding a 
sugarfactory north of cattenires. the battalion followed on in due 
course, reached the railway embankment, set up headquarters in a 
roadtunnel under it there was no firing, and received telephonic 
orders that at 5 a. m. on the 10th october they would pass through 
the other two battalions and continue the advance, which, henceforth, 
was to be by bounds and without limit or barrage. then they lay up 
in the railway embankment and dozed. 

they assembled next morning the 10th in the dark, and, reinforced 
by seven corps cyclists and a battery of fieldguns, went forth 
into france at large, after a retiring enemy. nothing happened 
for a couple of miles, when they reached the outskirts of 
beauvaisencambrensis, on the cambrailecateau road, where a single 
sniper from one of the houses shot and killed 2nd lieutenant v. j. 
s. french, no. 4 company. a mile farther on, up the beauvaisquivy 
road, they found the village of bevillers heavily shelled by the 
enemy from a distance, so skirted round it, and sent in two small 
moppingup parties. here no. 4 company again came up against 
machinegun and sniper fire, but no casualties followed. their 
patrols reported the next bound all clear, and they pushed on, under 
heavy but harmless shelling, in the direction of quivy. at eight 
oclock their patrols waked up a breadth of machinegun nests along 
the whole of the front and that of the battalions to their left and 
right. they went to ground accordingly, and when the enemy artillery 
was added to the smallarm fire, the men dug slits for themselves 
and escaped trouble. for some time past the german shellstuff had 
been growing less and less effective, both in accuracy and bursting 
power, which knowledge cheered our troops. in the afternoon, as there 
were signs of the resistance weakening, our patrols put forth once 
more, and by five oclock the battalion had reached the third bound 
on the full battalion front. then, in the dusk, came word from the 
new zealand division on their right, that the division on their 
right again, had got forward, and that the new zealanders were 
pushing on to high ground south of quivy. with the message came one 
from no. 4 company, reporting that their patrols were out ahead, and 
in touch with the new zealanders on their right. there is no record 
that the news was received with enthusiasm, since it meant bounding 
on in the dark to the fourth bound, which they accomplished not 
before 10.30 that night, tired officers hunting up tired companies by 
hand and shoving them into their positions. these were on high ground 
northeast of quivy, with the battalions right on a farm, called 
fontaineautertre, which signifies the fountain on the little 
hill, a mile beyond the village. the 1st scots guards were on their 
left holding the village of st. hilairelescambrai. then, punctual 
as ever, rations came up battalion headquarters established itself 
in a real roofed house in the outskirts of quivy, and no. 1 company 
in reserve, was billeted in the village. 

next morning 11th october, when the 3rd guards brigade came through 
them and attacked over the naked grass and stubble fields towards st. 
python and solesmes, the battalion was withdrawn and sent to very 
good billets in quivy. the men having both upstairs and cellar 
room. all billets very dirty, says the diary, owing to the previous 
occupants hun apparently having taken delight in scattering all the 
civilian clothes, food, furniture, etc., all over the place. every 
one was tired out they had hardly slept for three nights but all 
were in the best of spirits. brigade headquarters had found what 
was described as a magnificent house with a most comfortable bed 
in a large room. those who used it were lyric in their letters home. 

the total casualties for the 10th and 11th october were amazingly 
few. second lieutenant v. j. s. french was the only casualty among 
the officers, and, of other ranks, but three were killed and nine 
wounded. 

the officers who took part in the operations were these 


no. 1 company 

  lieut. h. e. van der noot. 
  2nd lieut. j. c. haydon. 
  2nd lieut. r. e. taylor. 


no. 2 company 

  lieut. e. m. harvey, m.c. 
  2nd lieut. g. t. todd. 
  2nd lieut. a. l. w. koch de gooreynd. 


no. 3 company 

  lieut. f. s. l. smith, m.c. 
  lieut. g. e. f. van der noot. 
  2nd lieut. j. j. b. brady. 


no. 4 company 

  capt. d. j. hegarty. 
  2nd lieut. hon. c. a. barnewall. 
  2nd lieut. v. t. s. french killed. 


battalion headquarters 

  major a. f. gordon, m.c. 
  capt. j. b. keenan. 
  capt. g. l. st. c. bambridge, m.c. 

they lay at quivy for the next week employed in cleaning up dirty 
billets, while the 3rd and 2nd brigades of the division were cleaning 
out the enemy rearguards in front of them from the west bank of 
the selle river, and roads and railways were stretching out behind 
our armies to bring redoubled supply of material. one of the extra 
fatigues of those days was to get the civil population out of the 
villages that the enemy were abandoning. this had to be done by 
night, for there is small chivalry in the german composition. quivy 
was shelled at intervals, and no parades larger than of a platoon 
were, therefore, allowed. the weather, too, stopped a scheme of 
fieldoperations in the back area between quivy and bevillers, and 
a washed and cleanly clothed battalion were grateful to their saints 
for both reliefs. 

on the 1zth october the sixtyfirst division took over the guards 
area, and that afternoon the battalion left quivy by crosscountry 
tracks for boussires and moved into position for what turned out to 
be all but the last stroke of the long game. 

the enemy on that front were by now across the steeply banked selle 
river, but the large, straggling village of solesmes, of which st. 
python is practically a suburb, was still held by them and would have 
to be cleaned out housetohouse. moreover, it was known to be full 
of french civils and getting them away in safety would not make the 
situation less difficult. 


st. python 

it was given out at brigade conference on the 1zth that the 
sixtyfirst division would take place on the right of the guards 
division and the nineteenth on its left in the forthcoming attack, 
and that the sixtyfirst would attend to solesmes, while the guards 
division pushed on northeast between st. python and haussy on a 
milewide front through the village of escarmain to capelle, a 
distance of some three and a half miles. the 1st and 3rd brigades 
would lead, the 2nd in reserve, and the passage of the selle would be 
effected in the dark by such bridges as the sappers could put up. 

the battalion moved nearer their assembly areas to st. 
hilairelescambrai, on the night of the 18th after company 
commanders had thoroughly explained to their men what was in store 
and on the 19th those commanders, with the intelligence officer, 
captain vernon, went up to high ground overlooking the battlefield. 
it was a closer and more crumpled land than they had dealt with 
hitherto, its steepsided valleys cut by a multitude of little 
streams running from norwest to southeast, with the interminable 
ruled line of the bavai road edging the great forest of mormal which 
lay north of landrecies. the wheel was swinging full circle, and 
men who had taken part in that ageago retreat from mons, amused 
themselves by trying to pick out familiar details in the landscape 
they had been hunted across four years before. but it was misty and 
the weather, faithful ally of the germans to the last, was breaking 
again. just as the battalion moved off from st. hilaire to their 
area on the railway line from valenciennes to le cateau, rain began 
and continued till six next morning, making every condition for 
attack as vile as it could. they dug them shallow trenches in case of 
shellfire, and sent down parties to reconnoitre the bridges over the 
selle. four bridges were available, i.e. existed in some shape, 
on or near the battalion front, but no one had a good word to say for 
any of them. 

there is a tale concerning the rivers here, which may be given 
without guarantee substantially as told rivers round maubeuge? 
twas all riversthe aunelle and the rhnelle and the pronelle, 
an more, too an our intelligence officer desirin to know the 
last word concernin each one of em before we paddled it. michael 
an me was for that duty. michael was a runner, afraid o nothing, 
but no small liar, and him as fed as myself with reportin on these 
same dam rivers and jerry expendin the last of his smallarm stuff 
round and round the country. i forget which river twas we were 
scouting, but he was ahead of me, the way he always was. presently 
he comes capering back, home, please, sergeant, says he. that 
hills stinking with jerries beyond. but the river? says i. ah, 
come home, says michael, an ill learn ye the road to be a v.c. 
so home we went to the intelligence officer, and twas then i should 
have spoke the truth. but michael was before me. i had no more than 
my mouth opened when he makes his report, which was my business, 
me being sergeant did i tell ye?, to put in. but michael was before 
me. he comes out with the width of the river, and its depth, and the 
nature of its bottom and the scenery, and all and all, the way youd 
ha sworn hed been a trout in it. when we was out of hearing, i told 
him he was a liar in respect to his river. river, says he, are 
ye after calling that a river? tis no bigger than a dickiebush 
ditch, he says. and anyway, says he, the battalionll rowl across 
it in the dark, the way it always does. ye cannot get wetter than 
wet, even in the micks then his conscience smote him, an when his 
company went down to this river in the dark, michael comes capering 
alongside whishpering between his hands boys says he, can ye 
swim, boys? i hope ye can all swim for, saints be my witness, i 
never wint near the river. for aught i know it may be an arrum of 
the sea. ah, lads, thry an learn to swim he says. then some 
one chases him off before the officer comes along an we wint over 
michaels river the way he said we would. ye can not get wetter than 
weteven in the micks. 

it was a quiet night, except for occasional bursts of machinegun 
fire, but there was no shelling of the assembly area as the 2nd 
grenadiers formed up on their right, with the 2nd coldstream in 
reserve. nos. 1 and 2 companies captain a. w. l. paget, and 
lieutenant e. m. harvey, m.c. moved off first, no. 3 in support 
captain bambridge, and no. 4 2nd lieutenant o. r. baldwin in 
reserve. the barrage opened with a percentage of demoralising 
flameshells. there was very little artillery retaliation, and beyond 
getting rather wetter than the rain had already made them, the 
battalion did not suffer, except from smallarm fire out of the dark. 
the first objective, a section of the solesmesvalenciennes road, 
was gained in an hour, with but eight casualties, mainly from our 
own shorts in the barrage, and several prisoners and machineguns 
captured. the prisoners showed no wish to fight. 

the companies had kept direction wonderfully well in the dark, and 
reached the second and last objective under increased machinegun 
fire, but still without much artillery. the 3rd guards brigade on 
their left had been hung up once or twice, which kept no. 2 company, 
the left leading company, and nos. 3 and 4 in support busy at 
odd times forming defensive flanks against sniping. by halfpast 
five, however, they were all in place, and set to dig in opposite 
the village of vertain. then dull day broke and with light came 
punishment. the enemy, in plain sight, opened on them with everything 
that they had in the neighbourhood, from z a. m. to 10 p. m. of the 
20th. the two front companies were cut off as long as one could see, 
and a good deal of the stuff was delivered over open sights. it was 
extremely difficult to get the wounded away, owing to the continuous 
sniping. but, through providence, or the defect of enemy ammunition, 
or the depth of the slits the men had dug, casualties were very few. 
battalion headquarters and the ground where no. 4 company lay up 
were most thoroughly drenched, though an officer of no. 3 company, 
whose experience was large, described his mens share as about the 
worst and most accurate shelling i have been through. they were, 
in most places, only a hundred yards away from a dugin enemy bent 
on blessing them with every round left over in the retreat. during 
the night, which was calmer, our artillery dealt with those mixed 
batteries and groups so well that, although no man could show a 
finger above his shelter in some of the company areas, the shelling 
next day was moderate. the forward posts were still unapproachable, 
but they sent out patrols from nos. 1 and 2 companies to report on 
the river harpies, the next stream to the selle, and to keep it 
under observation. this was an enterprise no commander would have 
dreamed of undertaking even three months ago. the enemy sniping went 
on. the 2nd coldstream, who had been moved up to protect the right 
flank of the 2nd grenadiers the sixtyfirst division, being delayed 
some time over the clearing up and evacuation of solesmes, was not 
yet abreast of them, were withdrawn to billets at st. hilaire in the 
course of the afternoon but word came that neither the grenadiers 
nor the irish need look to be relieved. it rained, too, and was 
freezing cold at night. another expert in three years of miseries 
writes one of the worst places i have ever been in. heavy rain all 
day and night.... more shelling if we were seen moving about. heavy 
rain all day.... soaked through and shivering with cold. the diary 
more temperately the men were never dry from the time they left 
their billets in st. hilaire on the evening of the 20th, and there 
was no shelter whatever for any of the companies. so they relieved 
them during the night of the 21st, front companies 1 and 2 returning 
to the accommodation vacated by their supports, 3 and 4. 

battalion relief came when the 24th battalion royal fusiliers second 
division took over from them and the grenadiers and got into 
position for their attack the next morning. an early and obtrusive 
moon made it difficult to fetch away the frontposts, and though 
the leading company reached the selle on its way back at a little 
after five, the full relief was not completed till halfpast nine, 
when they had to get acrosscountry to the main road and pick up the 
lorries that took them to very good billets at carnires. their 
own details had seen to that and they arrived somewhere in the 
early morning beat and footsore, but without a single casualty in 
relieving. their losses for the whole affair up to the time of their 
relief were one officer captain and adjutant j. b. keenan wounded 
in the face by a piece of shell, the sole casualty at battalion 
headquarters ten other ranks killed fortytwo wounded, of whom two 
afterwards died, and two missingfiftyfive in all. 

the companies were officered as follows 


no. 1 company 

  capt. a. w. l. paget, m.c. 


no. 2 company 

  lieut. e. harvey, m.c. 


no. 3 company 

  capt. g. l. st. c. bambridge. 


no. 4 company 

  2nd lieut. o. r. baldwin. 


battalion headquarters 

  major a. f. gordon, m.c. 
  capt. j. b. keenan. 
  capt. c. a. j. vernon. 

cleaning up began the next day where fine weather in most delightful 
billets was cheered by the news that the second divisions attack 
on vertain had been a great success. in those days they looked no 
further than their neighbours on either side. 

every battle, as had been pointed out, leaves its own impression. st. 
python opened with a wild but exciting chase in the wet and dark, 
which, at first, seemed to lead straight into germany. it ended, as 
it were, in the sudden rising of a curtain of grey, dank light that 
struck all the actors dumb and immobile for an enormously long and 
hungry stretch of time, during which they mostly stared at what they 
could see of the sky above them, while the air filled with dirt and 
clods, and single shots pecked and snarled round every stone of each 
mans limited skyline the whole ending in a blur of running water 
under starlight that was when they recrossed the selle river, and 
confused memories of freezing together in lumps in lorries, followed 
by a dazed day of shellmadness, when all ears and eyes were 
intolerably overburdened with echoes and pictures, and men preferred 
to be left alone. but they were washed and cleaned and reclothed 
with all speed, and handed over to their company officers for the 
drill that chases off bad dreams. the regimental sergeantmajor got 
at them, too, after their hair was cut, and the massed brigade drums 
played in the village square of carnires, and, ere the end of the 
month, intercompany football was in full swing. 

a draft of ninetyone other ranks joined for duty on the 22nd 
october. lieutenantcolonel baggallay, m.c., came back from leave 
and, in the absence of the brigadier, assumed command of the 
brigade, and captain d. w. gunston joined. 


the breakup 

on the last day of october they moved from carnires to st. hilaire 
and took over the 3rd grenadiers billets in the factory there, all 
of which, house for house, officers and men, was precisely as before 
the attack on the 20th, ten days ago. but those ten days had borne 
the british armies on that front beyond valenciennes in the north to 
within gunshot of le quesnoy in the centre, and to the sambre canal, 
thirty miles away, in the south. elsewhere, lille had been evacuated, 
the lower half of western flanders cleared, from the dutch frontier 
to tournai, while almost every hour brought up from one or other of 
the french and american armies, on the meuse and the argonne, fresh 
tallies of abandoned stores and guns, and of prisoners gathered in 
rather than captured. behind this welter, much as the glare of a mine 
reveals the faade of a falling townhall, came word of the collapse 
of bulgaria, turkey, and austria. the whole of the herd of the hun 
tribes were on the move, uneasy and afraid. it remained so to shatter 
the mass of their retiring forces in france that they should be in 
no case to continue any semblance of further war without complete 
destruction. were they permitted to slink off unbroken, they might 
yet make stand behind some shorter line, or manufacture a semblance 
of a face before their own people that would later entail fresh 
waste and weariness on the world.9 

the weather and the destruction they had left in their wake was, as 
on the somme, aiding them now at every turn, in spite of all our 
roadmen and engineers could do. our airmen took toll of them and 
their beasts as they retreated along the congested ways but this was 
the hour when the delays, divided councils and specially the strikes 
of past years had to be paid for, and the giant bombingplanes that 
should have taught fear and decency far inside the german frontiers 
were not ready. 

a straight drive from the west on to the german lateral 
communications promised the quickest return. it was laid in the hands 
of the first, third, and fifth armies to send that attack home, and 
with the french and american pressure from the south, break up the 
machine past repair. 

men, today, say and believe that they knew it would be the last 
battle of the war, but, at the time, opinions varied and the 
expectations of the rank and file were modest. the thing had gone 
on so long that it seemed the order of life and, though the enemy 
everywhere fell back, yet he had done so once before, and over 
very much the same semiliquid muck as we were floundering in that 
autumns end. the better the news, the worse the chance of a 
knock, argued the veterans, while the young hands sent out with 
high assurance, at draftparades, that the war was on its last legs, 
discovered how the machinegunfenced rear of retirements was no 
routemarch. there was them that came from warley shouting, yell 
understand and there was them that came saying nothing at all, and 
liking it no more than that but i do not remember any one of us 
looked to be out of it inside six months. nonot even when we was 
dancing into maubeuge. we thought jerry wanted to get his wind. 

on the 4th november, one week before the end, twentysix british 
divisions moved forward on a thirtymile front from oisy to north of 
valenciennes, the whole strength of all their artillery behind them. 

the guards position had been slightly shifted. instead of working 
south of le quesnoy, the division was put in a little north of the 
town, on the banks of the river rhnelle, between the sixtysecond 
division on their right and the fortysecond on their left. the 
battalion had marched from st. hilaire, in the usual small fine rain, 
on the 2nd november to billets in bermerain and bivouacs near by. 
it meant a tenmile tramp of the preduckboard era, in the midst of 
mired horse and lorrytransport, over country where the enemy had 
smashed every bridge and culvert, blocked all roads and pullingout 
places with minecraters, and sown houses, old trenches, and dugouts 
with fanciful deathtraps. the land was smallfeatured and full 
of little hills, so heavily hedged and orcharded that speculative 
battalions could be lost in it in twenty minutes. there were coveys, 
too, of french civils, rescued and evacuated out of the villages 
around, wandering against the stream of eastbound traffic. these 
forlorn little groups, all persuaded that the war was over and that 
they could return to their houses tomorrow, had to be shifted and 
chaperoned somehow through the chaos but the patience and goodwill 
of our people were unending. 

the wet day closed with a conference at brigade headquarters, but 
the enemy had thrown out our plan for action on that sector by 
thoughtlessly retiring on both flanks of the division, as well as a 
little on the front of it, and final orders were not fixed till after 
midnight on the 3rd november. 

the 1st and 2nd guards brigade were to attack, the 3rd in reserve. 
of the 1st brigade, the 2nd coldstream would take the line as far as 
the first objective the 2nd grenadiers would then come through and 
carry on to the next line, the irish guards in support. the brigades 
assembly area was across the rhnelle river, east of the long and 
straggling village of villerspol, on the jenlainle quesnoy road. 
zero was fixed for z.20. the battalion marched from bermerain, and 
met its first enemy shell as it was going under the valenciennes 
railway embankment. what remained of the roads were badly congested 
with troops, and one gets the idea that the staff work was casual. 
to begin with, the battalion found the 3rd grenadiers and the 1st 
scots guards between themselves and the 2nd grenadiers, which was not 
calculated to soothe any c.o. desirous of keeping his appointment. 
apparently they got through the scots guards but when they reached 
the rhnelle, its bridge being, of course, destroyed, and the r.e. 
working like beavers to mend it, they had to unship their lewisguns 
from the limbers, tell the limbers to come on when the bridge was 
usable, and pass the guns over by hand. while thus engaged the scots 
guards caught them up, went through them triumphantly, made exactly 
the same discovery that the irish had done, and while they in turn 
were wrestling with their limbers, the irish, who had completed their 
unshipping, went through them once more, and crossed the rhnelle 
on the heels of the last man of the 3rd grenadiersone at a time, 
being assisted up the bank by german prisoners. by the mercy of the 
saints, who must have been kept busy all night, the shelling on the 
bridge and its approaches ceased while that amazing procession got 
over. they were shelled as they reformed on the top of the steep 
opposite bank, but by marvellous goodluck no casualties got into 
artillery formation were shelled again, and this time hit, and 
longrange machinegun fire met them over the next crest of ground. 
it was all ideal machinegun landscape. the 2nd grenadiers, whom 
they were supporting, had been held up by low fire from the village 
of wagnieslepetit on their left, a little short of the first 
objective, which was the road running from wagnies, south to frasnoy. 
the battalion dug in behind them where it was, and after an hour 
or so the enemy opened fire with one solitary, mad trenchmortar. 
not more than a dozen rounds were sent over, and these, very 
probably, because the weapon happened to lie under their hands, and 
was used before being abandoned. and luck had it that this chance 
demonstration should kill lieutenant a. l. bain andy bain, who 
had joined for duty not a week ago. he was the last officer killed in 
the battalion, and one of the best. lieutenant f. s. l. smith, m.c., 
also was wounded. they stayed in their scratchholes till late in 
the afternoon, as the troops of the fortysecond division on their 
left were held up too, but the 2nd guards brigade on their right 
gradually worked forward. some of their divisional fieldguns came 
up and shelled wagnieslepetit into silence, and at halfpast four 
orders arrived for the battalion to go through the 2nd grenadiers 
and continue at large into the dusk that was closing on the blind, 
hedgescreened country. there was no particular opposition beyond 
stray shells, but the boggybanked aunelle had to be crossed on 
stretchers, through thick undergrowth, in a steep valley. everything 
after that seemed to be orchards, high hedges, and sunk and raised 
roads, varied with soft bits of cultivation, or hopelessly muddledup 
culdesacs of farmtracks. the companies played blindmans buff 
among these obstacles in the pitchdark, as they hunted alternately 
for each other and the troops on their flanks. there was very 
heavy shelling on the three most advanced companies as well as on 
brigade headquarters throughout the night. the men dug in where they 
were and casualties, all told, came to about twenty. very early 
on the 5th november the 3rd guards brigade passed through them and 
continued the advance. preuxausart, the village behind them, had 
been taken by the 2nd brigade the evening and the night before, so 
the battalion came out of its slits and went back to billet in its 
relieved and rejoicing streets, where the inhabitants on coming out 
of their cellars in the morning were delighted to find british troops 
again, and showed the greatest cordiality. if rumour be true, they 
also showed them how easily their hun conquerors had been misled 
and hoodwinked in the matter of good vintages buried and set aside 
against this very day. the men were very comfortable. 

the fact that austria was reported out of the war did not make the 
next day any less pleasant, even though it rained, and all the 
windows in the battalion headquarters were broken by one shell. 
battalion headquarters had come through worse than broken glass in 
its time, but was now beginning to grow fastidious. 

on the afternoon of the zth november the battalion marched to bavai 
over muddy roads in a drizzle. even then, men have said, there 
was no general belief in the end of armageddon. they looked for 
a lull, perhaps very possibly some sort of conference and waste 
of time which would give the enemy breath for fresh enterprise. 
a few, however, insist that the careful destruction of the roads 
and railwaybridges and the indifference of the prisoners as they 
poured in warned them of the real state of affairs. it looked as 
if the jerries had done all the harm they could think of, and were 
chucking itlike boys caught robbing an orchard. there wasnt an 
atom of dignity or decency about any of em. just dirt and exhausted 
jerrydom. what the battalion felt most was having to make detours 
round broken bridges, and to dig ramps in minecraters on the roads 
to get their lewisguns across. they jettisoned their secondline 
transport at a convenient chteau outside bavai on this account 
found that there were no arrangements for billeting in the town, so 
made their own, and, while bavai was being shelled, got into houses 
and again were very comfortable. the 2nd brigade were in the front 
line on the railway, and next day the 1st brigade were to lead and 
capture maubeuge, seven miles down a road which cut across the line 
of their earlier stages in the retreat from mons, and three miles, as 
a shell ranges, from the village of malplaquet. 

they began their last day, half an hour after midnight, marching 
as a battalion out of bavai with their lewisgun limbers. twice 
they were slightly shelled once at least they had to unpack and 
negotiate more minecraters at crossroads. it was a populous world 
through which they tramped, and all silently but tensely awakea 
world made up of a straight, hard road humped above the level of the 
fields in places, rather like the menin road when it was young, but 
with untouched tiled houses alongside. here and there one heard the 
chatter of a machinegun, as detached and irrelevant as the laugh 
of an idiot. it would cease, and a single fieldgun would open as 
on some private quarrel. then silence, and a suspicion, born out of 
the darkness, that the road was mined. next, orders to the companies 
to spread themselves in different directions in the dark, to line 
ditches and the like for fear of attack. then an overtaking, at 
wrecked crossroads, of some of the 2nd brigade, who reported patrols 
of the 3rd grenadiers had pushed on into maubeuge without opposition, 
and that the rest of that battalion was gone on. just before dawn, 
no. 4 company of the irish, marching on a road parallel to the 
highway, ran into a company of germans retiring. the diary says a 
short sharp fight ensued in which five of the enemy were wounded 
and twelve captured, the rest getting off in the dark. but there 
is a legend it may have grown with the years that the two bodies 
found themselves suddenly almost side by side on converging tracks, 
and that the irish, no word given, threw back to the instincts of 
fontenoyfaced about, frontrank kneeling, rearrank standing, and 
in this posture destroyed all that company. it was a thing that might 
well have come about darkling in a land scattered with odds and 
ends of drifting, crazed humanity. no. 2 company solemnly reported 
the capture of two whole prisoners just after they had crossed the 
railway in the suburbs of maubeuge, which they passed through on the 
morning of the 9th, and by noon were duly established and posted, 
company by company, well to the east of it. no. 2 company lay in 
the village of assevant, with pickets on the broken bridge over the 
river there, an observationline by day and all proper supports no. 
4 company in posts on the road and down to the river, and nos. 1 and 
3 in reserve yeomanry and corps cyclists out in front as though the 
war were eternal. 


after the armistice 

and, thus dispersed, after a little shelling of assevant during the 
night, the irish guards received word that an armistice was declared 
at 11 a. m. this morning, november 11. 

men took the news according to their natures. indurated pessimists, 
after proving that it was a lie, said it would be but an interlude. 
others retired into themselves as though they had been shot, or went 
stiffly off about the meticulous execution of some trumpery detail 
of kitcleaning. some turned round and fell asleep then and there 
and a few lost all holds for a while. it was the appalling new 
silence of things that soothed and unsettled them in turn. they did 
not realize till all sounds of their trade ceased, and the stillness 
stung in their ears as sodawater stings on the palate, how entirely 
these had been part of their strained bodies and souls. it felt 
like falling through into nothing, yell understand. listening for 
what wasnt there, and tryin not to shout when you remembered for 
why. men coming up from details camp, across old unwholesome 
areas, heard nothing but the roar of the lorries on which they had 
stolen their lift, and rejoiced with a childish mixture of fear as 
they topped every unscreened rise that was now mere scenery such 
as tourists would use later. to raise the head, without thought of 
precaution against what might be in front or on either flank, into 
free, still air was the first pleasure of that great release. to lie 
down that night in a big barn beside unscreened braziers, with ones 
smiling companions who talked till sleep overtook them, and, when 
the last happy babbler had dropped off, to hear the longforgotten 
sound of a horses feet trotting evenly on a hard road under a full 
moon, crowned all that had gone before. each man had but one thought 
in those miraculous first hours ieven i myself, herehave come 
through the war to scorn the shelter of sunken roads, hedges, walls 
or lines of trees, and to extend in unmartial crowds across the whole 
width of a pav, were exercises in freedom that he arrived at later. 
we cannot realize it at all. ... so mad with joy we dont feel yet 
what it all means. the home letters were all in this strain. 

the battalion was relieved on the 12th november by the 2nd grenadiers 
and billeted in the faubourg de mons. all maubeuge was hysterical 
with its emotions of release, and well provided with wines which, 
here as elsewhere, had somehow missed the german nose. the city 
lived in her streets, and kissed everybody in khaki, that none should 
complain. but the battalion was not in walkingout order, and so had 
to be inspected rigorously. morningdrill outside billets next day 
was in the nature of a public demonstrationto the scandal of the 
grave sergeants 

on the 14th a great thanksgivingservice was held in the cathedral 
for all the world, the battalion providing the guard of honour at the 
altar, and lining the place darmes at the presentation of a flag 
by the mayor of maubeuge to the majorgeneral. the massed drums of 
the division played in the square in the afternoon, an event to be 
remembered as long as the battalion dinner of the evening. they were 
all routemarched next morning for an hour and a half to steady them, 
and on the 16th, after dinner, set off in freezing weather for the 
first stage of their journey to cologne. it ran via bettignies and 
then to villerssirenicole, a matter of five and a half miles. 

on the 1zth they crossed the belgian frontier at givet and reached 
binche through a countryside already crowded with returning english, 
french, italian, and belgian prisoners. one diary notes them like 
migrating birds, all hopping along the road, going due west. binche 
mobbed the drums as one man and woman when they played in the town 
at retreat, but it was worse at charleroi on the 19th, where they 
could hardly force their way through the welcoming crowds. the place 
was lit from end to end, and the whole populace shouted for joy at 
deliverance. 

now that they had returned as a body to civilization, it was needful 
they should be dressed, and they were paraded for an important 
inspection of greatcoats, and, above all, gloves. that last, and the 
fact that belts, when walking out, were worn over the greatcoats 
were sure signs that war was done, and his majestys foot guards 
had come into their own. but they found time at charleroi, among 
more pleasant duties, to arrest three german soldiers disguised as 
civilians. 

on the 23rd they left for sartst.laurent, whose mayor, beneath a 
vast belgian flag, met and escorted them into the town. the country 
changed as they moved on from flat coaldistricts to untouched hills 
and woods. on the 24th they picked up a dump of eightyfour guns of 
all calibres, handed over according to the terms of the armistice 
passed through a tract of heavily wired country, which was evidently 
intended for the meuse line that the germans were to have fallen back 
on and a little later crossed being the first of the division to 
do so the steeply banked, swiftly running meuse by a pontoon bridge. 
next their road climbed into nanine, one of the loveliest villages, 
they thought, they had ever seen. but their hearts were soft in those 
days, and all that world of peace seemed good. they dared not halt 
at sorinnelalongue the next day, as the place was infected with 
influenza spanish fever, so pushed on to lesves, and on the 26th 
november to sore, where was another wayside dump of thirty or forty 
hun guns. it is noteworthy that the discarded tools of their trade 
frankly bored them. where a hun, under like circumstances, would have 
retriumphed and called on his servile gods, these islanders of 
whom almost a half were now english were afflicted with a curious 
restlessness and strong desire to get done with the work in hand. all 
their world was under the same reaction. they had to wait at sore 
for three days, as supplies were coming up badly. indeed, on the 
28th november, the diary notes bitterly that for the first time in 
the war the supplies failed to arrive. the quartermaster managed to 
improvise breakfasts for the battalion. it was not all the fault of 
bad roads or the dispersion of the troops. the instant the strain was 
taken off, there was a perceptible slackening everywhere, most marked 
in the backareas, on the clerical and forwarding sides. every one 
wanted to get home at once, and worked with but half a mind which, 
also, is human nature. 

they were on the road again by december 5 with the rest of their 
brigade, and reached man in the afternoon over muddy roads. by the 
6th they were at villersst.gertrude hillmarching through beautiful 
scenery, which did not amuse them, because, owing to the state of 
communications, supplies were delayed again. so, on the 8th december 
at lierneux, fifteen miles from villersst.gertrude, another halt 
was called for another three days, while company officers, homesick 
as their men, drilled them in the winter dirt. on the 11th they 
crossed the german frontier line at recht, and the drums played the 
battalion over to the regimental march. but, yell understand, 
we was all wet the most of that time and fighting with the mud 
an our boots. twas jerrys own weather the minute we set foot in 
his country, and we none of us felt like conquerors. we was just 
dhrippin micks. at vielsalm, almost the last village outside 
germany, they picked up a draft of sixty men to share with them the 
horrors of peace ahead, and a supplysystem gone to bits behind them. 

their road wound through small and inconspicuous hamlets among wooded 
hills, by stretches of six or seven hours marching a day. the people 
they had to deal with seemed meek and visibly oppressed with the fear 
of rough treatment. that removed from their minds, they stepped aside 
and looked wonderingly at the incomprehensible enemy that tramped 
through their streets, leaving neither ruin nor rape behind. by the 
18th december the advance had reached lovenich, and, after two days 
rest there, they entered cologne on the 23rd december with an absence 
of display that might or might not have been understood by the 
natives. they had covered more than two hundred miles over bad roads 
in bad boots that could not be repaired nor thrown away, and but one 
man had fallen out. the drums played brian boru when they entered 
the hohenzollern ring their majorgeneral beheld that last march, 
and they were duly photographed in the wet while the world that 
saw such photographs in the weekly illustrated papers was honestly 
convinced that the great war and all war was at an end for evermore. 

then really serious trouble overtook them, which was, in some sort, 
a forecast of the days to come. their billets at nippes, in the 
suburbs of cologne, were excellent and clean, though, of course, 
in need of the usual improvements which every battalion of the 
brigade is bound to make but on christmas day, owing to transport 
difficulties, the mens christmas dinner did not arrive this thing 
had never happened in the whole history of the war pressure of work 
in the front line had delayed that dinner, as on the somme enemy 
attentions had caused it to be eaten in haste, a sort of passover, 
as in the dread salient, but complete breakdown was unheard of. 
the battalion, rightly, held it mortal sin, and spoke their minds 
about the transport which was fighting mud and distance across 
the hills as loyally as ever. it was the backareas that had been 
caught unprepared by the peace. but, on christmas night superb and 
unscrupulous staffwork went to secure it, a faithful lorry ploughed 
in from paris with what was wanted, and on boxing day the full and 
complete christmas dinner was served, and for the fifth and last time 
their commanding officer performed the sacred ritual of going round 
the dinners. 

they sat them down, twentytwo officers and six hundred and 
twentyeight other ranks, and none will know till judgment day how 
many ghosts were also present. for the first time since august, 
14, the monthly returns showed no officer or man killed, wounded, 
or missing. the two battalions had lost in all two thousand three 
hundred and fortynine dead, including one hundred and fifteen 
officers. their total of wounded was five thousand seven hundred and 
thirtynine. of both these the 1st battalion, by virtue of thirteen 
months longer in the field, could reckon more than a generous half. 

they were too near and too deeply steeped in the war that years end 
to realize their losses. their early dead, as men talked over the 
past in cologne, seemed to belong to immensely remote ages. even 
those of that very spring, of whom friends could still say, if 
soandso had only lived to see this stood as far removed as the 
shadowy great ones of the prebomb, preduckboard twilight and, in 
some inexpressible fashion, they themselves appeared to themselves 
the only living people in an uncaring world. yet cologne was alive 
with soldiery roads were roaring full, as communications were 
restored men stood guard over visible gun and ammunitiondumps 
the battalion joined in marches to the bridgeheads, attended 
football matches, saw hosts of new faces belonging to new troops of 
all breeds and watched about them, in the wet, grey weather, the 
muddyfaced hunfolk, methodically as usual, trying to find out just 
how far it was expedient to go with the heralds of the alleged new 
order. 

but yell understand, when everything was said and done, there 
was nothing real to it at all, except when we got to talking and 
passing round the names of them we wished was with us. we was lonely 
in those days. the half of us was church of england by then, too. but 
we were lonely, yell understand, as units. and our billets, mind ye, 
maagnificent, with walls and lockers and doors and all. the same for 
the officers and there was mr.  that id known well any time 
these last two winters, freezing and swearing alongside of me in any 
shellhole we could find, and glad to be out of the windand now, 
him cursin in his quarters because he had not the jerrytalk for the 
german for turn off that dam steamheat and thats war also. 

but ye might tell that we was lonely, most of all. before god, we 
micks was lonely 


commanding officers 1st battalion 

from august 12, 1914 

   
     rank                   name               from b.e.f.      to 
   
  lt.col.    hon. g. h. morris                  12.8.14      1.9.14 
  major       h. h. stepney                       2.9.14     1z.9.14 
  lt.col.    lord ardee, c.b.e.                 18.9.14     3.11.14 
    temp.  hon. j. f. trefusis, d.s.o.         4.11.14    15.8.15 
            g. h. c. madden                    16.8.15     1.11.15 
            r. c. a. mccalmont, d.s.o.          2.11.15     2.3.1z 
    actg.  h. r. alexander, d.s.o., m.c.       3.3.1z     23.5.1z 
            c. e. rocke, d.s.o.                24.5.1z     11.z.1z 
            r. v. pollok, c.b.e., d.s.o.       12.z.1z     19.6.18 
            r. r. c. baggally, d.s.o., m.c.    20.6.18    to return 
                                                           to england. 
   


end of vol. i 


footnotes 

1 about this time, on a distant flank of the war, there was a very 
young french lieutenant of artillery who, in his first action, when 
evening came, telephoned to his superior officer as to dispositions 
for the night, in the sincere belief that, following the custom of 
all wars up to date, the guns would stop as the darkness closed. his 
answer was this will be a war in which no one ever goes to bed. 

2  ... and the next time i saw zillebeke it was a deserted ruin, 
and the small house whose inmates had been so kind to my subalterns 
and me was a heap of debris.extract from a company commanders 
diary. 

3 at the crossroads near klein zillebeke we halted, lying down 
on each side the road as shells were coming over. in the centre of 
the road lay a dead trooper of some british cavalry regiment, his 
horse also half dead across him. a woman passed by.... she had all 
her household treasures strapped on her back and held the hands of 
two very small children. she took no notice of any one, but i saw the 
two little children shy away from the dead man.diary of a company 
officer. 

4 their brigadier, lord cavan, wrote on the 20th november to 
captain n. orrewing, commanding the battalion i want you to convey 
to every man in your battalion that i consider that the safety of 
the right flank of the british section depended entirely upon their 
staunchness after the disastrous day, nov. 1. those of them that were 
left made history, and i can never thank them enough for the way in 
which they recovered themselves and showed the enemy that the irish 
guards must be reckoned with, however hard hit. 

5 brigade reserve means in readiness to move at short notice in 
any direction to support all wagons standing packed day and night, 
except that the blankets may be used by the men. corps reserve takes 
a battalion definitely out of the line for the time being and out of 
reach of all except airbombing. 

6 i saw him slip back over the parapet in the mornin mist, the 
way he always did, just behind the officer going the rounds. an his 
pockets was bulgin. i had been layin for him a long while because 
i knew he had something i wanted. so i went up behind him and i said 
quite quiet, c, ill take your nights pickins if its the same 
to you. he knew it had to be, an to do him justice he bore it well. 
well, anyway, sergeant, says he, tis worth five francs to you, is 
it not? yes, says i and i gave him the five francs then an there, 
an he emptied his pockets into my hands. twas worth all of five 
francs to me, cs work that night. an he never bore me malice 
thereafter.a sergeants tale. 

z he was succeeded by majorgeneral feilding in command of the 
guards division brigadiergeneral pereira commanding the 1st guards 
brigade. 

8 these were vast cellars reached by a hundred steps, and at the 
bottom of them resided a very old soldier, who did little more than 
boil the hot water for the officers baths and look after a certain 
mascotgoat which had been given them by a french corps. when the 
order to move at once came, the parting words of the officer in 
charge of the goat to the aged man were now you look after the goat 
and our blankets, and dont walk about upstairs. you neednt 
worry about yourself. if youre taken prisoner well send you lots of 
parcels. look after the goat and hang on to our blankets. he did. 

9 this, be it remembered, gives roughly the idea at the close of 
1918. 




                                     




transcribers note 

  obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been 
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within 
  the text and consultation of external sources. 

  except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text, 
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained. for example 
  duckboard, duckboard aircraft, aircraft blockhouses, blockhouses 
  unregarded perforable incuriousness builded unkeyed. 

  pg 124 young soliders were replaced by young soldiers were. 
  pg 139 a n.c.o. and replaced by an n.c.o. and. 
  pg 165 undistinguishable in replaced by indistinguishable in. 
  pg 1zz undistinguishable landscapes replaced by 
          indistinguishable landscapes. 
  pg 200 in divisonal reserve replaced by in divisional reserve. 
  pg 206 from croiselles to replaced by from croisilles to. 
  pg 213 and thermit shells replaced by and thermite shells. 
  pg 219 a n.c.o. and replaced by an n.c.o. and. 



end of the project gutenberg ebook the irish guards in the great war, 
volume i of 2 


 this file should be named 646380.txt or 646380.zip  


this and all associated files of various formats will be found in 
httpwww.gutenberg.orgdirs646364638 


updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will 
be renamed. 

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright 
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works, 
so the foundation and you can copy and distribute it in the united 
states without permission and without paying copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part 
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project 
gutenbergtm electronic works to protect the project gutenbergtm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark, 
and may not be used if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receive 
specific permission. if you do not charge anything for copies of this 
ebook, complying with the rules is very easy. you may use this ebook 
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, 
performances and research. they may be modified and printed and given 
awayyou may do practically anything in the united states with ebooks 
not protected by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the 
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. 

start full license 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenbergtm mission of promoting the free 
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work 
or any other work associated in any way with the phrase project 
gutenberg, you agree to comply with all the terms of the full 
project gutenbergtm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.orglicense. 

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project 
gutenbergtm electronic works 

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenbergtm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
trademarkcopyright agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or 
destroy all copies of project gutenbergtm electronic works in your 
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a 
project gutenbergtm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound 
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. project gutenberg is a registered trademark. it may only be 
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenbergtm electronic works 
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenbergtm electronic works if you follow the terms of this 
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenbergtm 
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation the 
foundation or pglaf, owns a compilation copyright in the collection 
of project gutenbergtm electronic works. nearly all the individual 
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united 
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the 
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as 
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenbergtm mission of promoting 
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenbergtm 
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the 
project gutenbergtm name associated with the work. you can easily 
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the 
same format with its attached full project gutenbergtm license when 
you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are 
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, 
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this 
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any 
other project gutenbergtm work. the foundation makes no 
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any 
country outside the united states. 

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other 
immediate access to, the full project gutenbergtm license must appear 
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenbergtm work any work 
on which the phrase project gutenberg appears, or with which the 
phrase project gutenberg is associated is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copied or distributed 

  this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no 
  restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or reuse it 
  under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this 
  ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the 
  united states, youll have to check the laws of the country where you 
  are located before using this ebook. 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenbergtm electronic work is 
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law does not 
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the 
copyright holder, the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in 
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are 
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase project 
gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply 
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.z or 
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenbergtm 
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenbergtm electronic work is posted 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.z and any 
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms 
will be linked to the project gutenbergtm license for all works 
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenbergtm 
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this 
work or any other work associated with project gutenbergtm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenbergtm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including 
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access 
to or distribute copies of a project gutenbergtm work in a format 
other than plain vanilla ascii or other format used in the official 
version posted on the official project gutenbergtm web site 
www.gutenberg.org, you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense 
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means 
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original plain 
vanilla ascii or other form. any alternate format must include the 
full project gutenbergtm license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.z. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenbergtm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing 
access to or distributing project gutenbergtm electronic works 
provided that 

 you pay a royalty fee of 20 of the gross profits you derive from 
  the use of project gutenbergtm works calculated using the method 
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed 
  to the owner of the project gutenbergtm trademark, but he has 
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project 
  gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid 
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare or are 
  legally required to prepare your periodic tax returns. royalty 
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project 
  gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in 
  section 4, information about donations to the project gutenberg 
  literary archive foundation. 

 you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies 
  you in writing or by email within 30 days of receipt that she 
  does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenbergtm 
  license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all 
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue 
  all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenbergtm 
  works. 

 you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of 
  receipt of the work. 

 you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
  distribution of project gutenbergtm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project 
gutenbergtm electronic work or group of works on different terms than 
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing 
from both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenbergtm 
trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project 
gutenbergtm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenbergtm 
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate 
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or 
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages  except for the right 
of replacement or refund described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenbergtm trademark, and any other party distributing a project 
gutenbergtm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund  if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money if any you paid for it by sending a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you 
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in 
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person 
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second 
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if 
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing 
without further opportunities to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you asis, with no 
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not 
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied 
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of 
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or 
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or 
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the 
remaining provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity  you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copies of project gutenbergtm electronic works in 
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the 
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenbergtm 
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, 
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of 
the following which you do or cause to occur a distribution of this 
or any project gutenbergtm work, b alteration, modification, or 
additions or deletions to any project gutenbergtm work, and c any 
defect you cause. 

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenbergtm 

project gutenbergtm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of 
computers including obsolete, old, middleaged and new computers. it 
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations 
from people in all walks of life. 

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the 
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenbergtms 
goals and ensuring that the project gutenbergtm collection will 
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenbergtm and future 
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see 
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at 
www.gutenberg.org  

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary  
archive foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501c3 educational corporation organized under the laws of the 
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundations ein or federal tax identification 
number is 646221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by 
u.s. federal laws and your states laws. 

the foundations principal office is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mailing address po box z501z5, fairbanks, ak 99zz5, but its 
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous 
locations. its business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, ut 84116, 801 596188z. email contact links and up to 
date contact information can be found at the foundations web site and 
official page at www.gutenberg.orgcontact 

for additional contact information 

    dr. gregory b. newby 
    chief executive and director 
    gbnewbypglaf.org 

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenbergtm depends upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of 
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations 
1 to 5,000 are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating 
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send 
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.orgdonate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we 
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who 
approach us with offers to donate. 

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make 
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from 
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation 
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to 
donate, please visit www.gutenberg.orgdonate 

section 5. general information about project gutenbergtm electronic works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project 
gutenbergtm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and 
distributed project gutenbergtm ebooks with only a loose network of 
volunteer support. 

project gutenbergtm ebooks are often created from several printed 
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not 
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper 
edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search 
facility www.gutenberg.org 

this web site includes information about project gutenbergtm, 
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
